<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN">
<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>The Taleef Shereef, Or Indian Materia Medica</title>
<author key="Kh&amacr;n, Mu&hdotb;ammad Shar&imacr;f Kh&amacr;n">[Mu&hdotb;ammad Shar&imacr;f Kh&amacr;n]</author>
<respStmt><resp>Translation</resp> <name key="Playfair, George" ref="http://viaf.org/viaf/37312300">George Playfair</name></respStmt>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name>Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=LCCN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLW>OL9420386W</idno>
<idno type=OCLC>504426282</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20081102083831playfair</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID490dd5da22f49</idno>
<idno type=PGSrc>#####</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:364bbdbd-1c41-4276-9c8f-eaa90691c604</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>53755</idno>
<date>2016-12-18</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="http://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type="Description">#####</note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>George Playfair</author>
<title>The Taleef Shereef, Or Indian Materia Medica</title>
<date>1833</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
<p>This work is sorted according to the Arabic (Urdu) alphabetical order. Headers have been supplied by the transcriber.

<p>When reading this text, please use the free font <xref url="http://software.sil.org/scheherazade/">Scheherazade</xref>, developed by SIL. This includes all characters required for Urdu, and is far more elegant than the fonts delivered with most computers. SIL is currently also developing a Nastaliq style font called <xref url="http://software.sil.org/awami/">Awami</xref>, which would be even more appropriate for this text, but, unfortunately, is not supported in most browers, and doesn&apos;t include a number of characters used in this old text.

<p>Both the transcription and the Urdu itself is not very consistent; no attempts have been made to improve that. The Urdu transcription used during production of this ebook is as follows:


<p><table rend="columns(2)">
<column rend="align(center) width(8%)">
<column rend="width(8%)">
<column rend="width(84%)">

<row role=label rend="align(center)"><cell>Letter    <cell>Transcription <cell>Notes

<row><cell><UR>A</UR>        <cell>A          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'a</UR>       <cell>'a         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'i</UR>       <cell>'i         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'A</UR>       <cell>'A         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>"A</UR>       <cell>"A         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>b</UR>        <cell>b          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>t</UR>        <cell>t          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>th</UR>       <cell>th         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'t</UR>       <cell>'t         <cell>Rendered with four dots.
<row><cell><UR>p</UR>        <cell>p          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>j</UR>        <cell>j          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>H</UR>        <cell>H          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>kh</UR>       <cell>kh         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>ch</UR>       <cell>ch         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>d</UR>        <cell>d          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>dh</UR>       <cell>dh         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'d</UR>       <cell>'d         <cell>Rendered with four dots.
<row><cell><UR>r</UR>        <cell>r          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>z</UR>        <cell>z          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>zh</UR>       <cell>zh         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'r</UR>       <cell>'r         <cell>Rendered with four dots.
<row><cell><UR>s</UR>        <cell>s          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>sh</UR>       <cell>sh         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>S</UR>        <cell>S          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>D</UR>        <cell>D          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>T</UR>        <cell>T          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>Z</UR>        <cell>Z          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>`</UR>        <cell>`          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>gh</UR>       <cell>gh         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>f</UR>        <cell>f          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>q</UR>        <cell>q          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>v</UR>        <cell>v          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>k</UR>        <cell>k          <cell rows=3><UR>k</UR> and <UR>g</UR> are often confused; <UR>'k</UR> is often used at the end of words.
<row><cell><UR>g</UR>        <cell>g
<row><cell><UR>'k</UR>       <cell>'k
<row><cell><UR>l</UR>        <cell>l          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>m</UR>        <cell>m          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>n</UR>        <cell>n          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'n</UR>       <cell>'n         <cell>Noon ghunna.
<row><cell><UR>-h</UR>       <cell>-h         <cell rows=3>Do-chasmi heh is normally used for aspirates only. This book is inconsistent in its usage.
<row><cell><UR>x</UR>        <cell>x
<row><cell><UR>"h</UR>       <cell>"h
<row><cell><UR>e</UR>        <cell>e          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>U</UR>        <cell>U          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'u</UR>       <cell>'u         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>I</UR>        <cell>I          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>y</UR>        <cell>y          <cell>
<row><cell><UR>'y</UR>       <cell>'y         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>||</UR>       <cell>||         <cell>
<row><cell><UR>E</UR>        <cell>E          <cell>This book uses <UR>I</UR> at the end of words.
</table>


<!-- Dictionary: http://urduseek.com/ -->


</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
        <language id=en-UK>English (United Kingdom)</language>
        <language id=de>German</language>
        <language id=fr>French</language>
        <language id=la>Latin</language>
        <language id=ur>Urdu</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>#####</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2011-01-01 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=noUrdu type=TranscriberNote>


<p>This ebook contains fragments in Urdu in Arabic script. If this doesn&apos;t work with your browser, or for some other reason you want to read this ebook without the Urdu fragments, you can download the <xref url="TaleefShereef-no-Urdu.html">version without Urdu</xref>.


<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>



<div1 id=notice type=TranscriberNote>
<head>Notice</head>

<p>The medical knowledge represented in this book is several centuries old. The publication of this book is for historical interest only, and is not to be construed as medical advice by Project Gutenberg or its volunteers. Medicinal plants should not be used without consulting a trained medical professional. Medical science has made considerable progress since this book was written. Recommendations or prescriptions have been superseded by better alternatives, or invalidated altogether. This book contains a number of prescriptions that are very dangerous.


<div1 id=titlepage type=TitlePage>


<p><figure id=titlepage-image rend="image(images/titlepage.png)">
<figDesc>Original Title Page.</figDesc>
</figure>



<titlePage>
<docTitle><titlePart>THE

<lb>TALEEF SHEREEF,</titlePart>

<lb><titlePart>OR

<lb>INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA;</titlePart></docTitle>

<byline>TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL.

<lb>BY

<lb><docAuthor>GEORGE PLAYFAIR, <hi rend=sc>Esq.</hi></docAuthor>

<lb>SUPERINTENDING SURGEON, BENGAL SERVICE.
</byline>


<docImprint>PUBLISHED BY

<lb>The Medical and Physical Society of Calcutta.

<lb>Calcutta:

<lb>PRINTED AT THE BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, CIRCULAR ROAD.
<lb>SOLD BY MESSRS. THACKER &amp; CO. CALCUTTA; &amp; BY MESSRS. PARBURY, ALLEN &amp; CO.
<lb><docDate>1833.</docDate>
</titlePage>




<pb n=iii>
<div1 id=preface type=Preface>
<head>TRANSLATOR&apos;S PREFACE.</head>


<p>In the course of a practice of upwards of twenty-six years in India, I have often had occasion to regret, that I had no publication to guide me, in my wish to become acquainted with the properties of native medicines, which I had frequently seen, in the hands of the Physicians of Hindoostan, productive of the most beneficial effects in many diseases, for the cure of which our Pharmacopeia supplied no adequate remedy; and the few which I had an opportunity of becoming acquainted with, so far exceeded my expectations, that I determined to make a Translation of the present work, for my own gratification and future guidance.

<p>Having finished the translation, I became convinced, that I should not have fulfilled the whole of my duty if I did not make it public; and ill calculated as I know myself for such an undertaking, I have ventured to offer it to the world, with all its imperfections.

<p>Conscious, that the liberal minded will give me credit for the best of motives, I shall not dread criticism; and if it has the effect of inducing those more competent to the task to an inquiry into the properties of native medicines, my views will have been fully accomplished.

<p>In writing the names of the different medicines, I have followed the Author&apos;s example, and have been guided solely by the pronunciation, without altering the sound given to the letters in English, and have not borrowed a single name from any work of Oriental literature. In this I may have acted wrong, but I did so from the conviction, that by this method, the names would be more familiar, and better understood, by the Natives in researches after the different drugs.

<pb n=iv><p>I have inserted as many of the systematic names as I could trace, both from Dr. Fleming&apos;s work, and those of others; but I regret, that I was not honored in the acquaintance of any Botanist who could have assisted me with more.

<p>To the youth of the profession, I trust the work may be acceptable, by leading them to the knowledge, that such medicines are in existence; and my medical brethren of the higher grades may not deem further inquiry into the properties of native drugs beneath their notice.

<p>To the profession at large, then, I beg leave to dedicate this Translation, with the hope, that they will make due allowance for all faults, and that some of the more experienced will favor us with another and better edition.

<p>To my respected friends Messrs. Wilson and Twining, the profession is indebted, that this little work ever saw light; and though they are godfathers to none of its errors, yet without their encouragement and aid, it must have slumbered in oblivion, and remained as was intended, (after the failure of an attempt on the part of the translator,) a manual for his own private use.




<pb n=v>
<div1 type=Glossary id=gloss>
<head>GLOSSARY.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Acouta,             <cell>Herpes.
<row><cell>Aruk,               <cell>Distilled liquid.
<row><cell>Boolbul,            <cell>Indian Nightingale.
<row><cell>Badgola,            <cell>Splenitis.
<row><cell>Coir,               <cell>Fibrous substance surrounding the Cocoanut.
<row><cell>Daad,               <cell>Impetigo.
<row><cell>Dhats,              <cell>Component parts of the human frame.
<row><cell>Elaous,             <cell>Disease of the Intestines. Introsusception.
<row><cell>Fetuck,             <cell>Hernia.
<row><cell>Goor,               <cell>Unrefined Sugar.
<row><cell>Juzam,              <cell>Black Leprosy.
<row><cell>Jow,                <cell>Barley.
<row><cell>Junglie Chuha,      <cell>The Forest Rat.
<row><cell>Khoonadeer,         <cell>Khoonazeer? Lupus, Cancer.
<row><cell>Kunzeer,            <cell>Cancer.
<row><cell>Mootiabin,          <cell>Total blindness, Gutta Serena.
<row><cell>Naringee,           <cell>The Orange.
<row><cell>Nachoona,           <cell>Opacity of the Cornea.
<row><cell>Neela Totha,        <cell>Sulphate of Copper.
<row><cell>Nuffsoodum,         <cell>Hæmoptysis.
<row><cell>Pilau, Poolau,      <cell>Dish made of meat and rice, seasoned with spices.
<row><cell>Peshanee,           <cell>The Forehead.
<row><cell>Paddy,              <cell>Rice in the husk.
<row><cell>Panroque,           <cell>Cold with Fever, also Jaundice.
<row><cell>Peendie,            <cell>A formula for females.
<row><cell>Paan,               <cell>A leaf, chewed by the Natives, with Catechu, Betel, and Lime.
<row><cell>Raal,               <cell>Gum Resin.
<row><cell>Rajerogue,          <cell>Carbuncle.
<row><cell>Soonpat,            <cell>Loss of sensation in parts of the body.
<row><cell>Soorkhbad,          <cell>Erythema.
</table>



<pb n=vii>
<div1 type=Errata id=errata>
<head>ERRATA.</head>

<p rend="class(transcribernote)">The following errata have been integrated in the text. Minor inconsistencies in the errata themselves have been ignored.

<p><table id=tErrata rend="font-size(small)">
<column>
<column rend="align(right)">
<column>
<column rend="align(right)">
<column>
<column rend="align(right)">
<column>

<row><cell>Article                <cell><ref target=p1>1</ref>         <cell>                      <cell>        <cell>line                <cell>20 <cell><hi>omit</hi> &lsquo;and.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell>&mdash;                        <cell>page                  <cell> 3      <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>10 <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;pealed&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;peeled.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell>&mdash;                        <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>22 <cell><hi>omit</hi> &lsquo;and stone.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p7>7</ref>         <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell> 5      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>AlU</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>AbI</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p56>56</ref>       <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>15      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>AkAs bylxI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>AkAs bylx"h</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p195>195</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>42      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>blUsykI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>blUsyk</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p203>203</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>43      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bn bykI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bn byl</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p212>212</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>pUAlA</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bnUlA</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p213>213</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>pnj chynI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>pnj chyz</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p219>219</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>45      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>pns</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>pnys</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p230>230</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>47      <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>21 <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;from,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;by.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell>&mdash;                        <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>25 <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;White leprosy <hi>or</hi> Juzam,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;White leprosy <hi>and</hi> Juzam.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p238>238</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>48      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bnys</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>byns</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p252>252</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>51      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bxndAlyl</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bxndAlI</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p266>266</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>53      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>b-hykh bnd</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>byj bnd</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p267>267</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bytx"h</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>byn"h</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell>&mdash;                        <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>12 &amp; 13 <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;Urine, lithontriptic, affections,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Urine, are lithontriptic, useful in affections.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p271>271</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>54      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>bylI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>byl</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p272>272</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>29 <cell><hi>omit</hi> &lsquo;bile.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p295>295</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>58      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>tyrsUgnd"h</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>tyrs gnd"h</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p317>317</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>62      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>tnyryk</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>tntryk</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p324>324</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>63      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>tUAkI yUm</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>tUykAm</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p351>351</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>67      <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>17 <cell><hi>omit</hi> &lsquo;are.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p383>383</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>71      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;Jamalgotay,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Jamalgota.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p509>509</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>88      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>rUhsn</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>rUhs</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p515>515</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>89      <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>rAhn pxylI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>rAhs p-hl</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<pb n=viii>                                                                                                                                      
<row><cell>Art.                   <cell><ref target=p523>523</ref>     <cell>page                  <cell> 89     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>rbch"hmytxI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>zkhmyxyAt</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p528>528</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell> 90     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>sdAArA</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>sArAml</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p536>536</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell> 91     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;Saale,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Saal;&rsquo; <hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>sAlI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>sAl</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p556>556</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell> 93     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>kxl mrAr</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>sdAkhUAr</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p629>629</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>106     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>snAqyA</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>snAqI</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p630>630</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>snykr</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>snykU</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p682>682</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>114     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;symptoms,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;disorders.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p747>747</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>124     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>kqrUrA</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>k-kUrA</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p763>763</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>127     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>omit the concluding word</hi> &lsquo;also.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p790>790</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>131     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>gU</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>g'yU</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p835>835</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>140     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>omit</hi> &lsquo;Hawk,&rsquo; <hi>and in line 6, for</hi> &lsquo;Baar,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Baaz.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p840>840</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>141     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>gytI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>gyt</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p857>857</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>144     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;<UR>UtbrI</UR>,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;<UR>ltUbrI</UR>.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p933>933</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>157     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;Moonjee,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Monje.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p987>987</ref>     <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>166     <cell>line                <cell>15 <cell><hi>omit</hi> &lsquo;and.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell>&mdash;                        <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>&mdash; <cell><ditto>line</ditto> <cell>16 <cell><hi>for</hi> &lsquo;Cherdee,&rsquo; <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Chordee.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
<row><cell><ditto>Article</ditto> <cell><ref target=p1015>1015</ref>   <cell><ditto>page</ditto>   <cell>172     <cell>                    <cell>   <cell><hi>omit the concluding words</hi> &lsquo;with great good success.&rsquo; <!--OK -->
</table>




<pb id=pb1 n=1>
</front>
<body>
<div1 id=taleef rend="toc-head(<URA>A</URA>)">
<head type=super><corr><UR>tAlyf shryf</UR></corr></head>

<head type=super>THE TALEEF SHEREEF,
<lb>OR
<lb><hi>INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA</hi>.</head>

<head type=sub>TRANSLATED FROM
<lb>THE ORIGINAL, WITH ADDITIONS.</head>


<head><UR>A</UR></head>

<p id=p1><ab type=parNum>1</ab> <hi rend=sc>Am, Ambe, Anbe</hi> <UR>'Am Amb"h Anb</UR>.&mdash;The Fruit, <hi>Mangifera Indica</hi>.

<p>The produce of a large tree very common in Hindostan. The fruit is about the size of, and very much resembling in shape, a goat&apos;s kidney, and having the external appearance of an apple. When ripe, it sometimes retains the green color, but oftener becomes yellow, or red and yellow.

<p>The virtues ascribed to this tree, are as follows:&mdash;The bruised leaves and young shoots applied to the hair, expedite its growth, and considerably darken its color.

<p>The bark of the trunk of the tree, and of its roots, is cooling and astringent; the former powerfully so. The leaves are astringent, and promote digestion; their ashes styptic.

<p>The young flowers are cool and drying; have a pleasant aromatic scent, and when taken internally, are cooling and astringent; recommended for the cure of chronic Gonorrh&oelig;a or Gleet, purulent expectoration, bilious foulness of the blood and boils. The young unripe fruit has much acidity, and is drying; moderately used, it increases all the animal secretions, and is beneficial in chronic affections of the liver; it promotes appetite, and is lithonthriptic. The fruit, when ripe, is sweet, cooling, <corr sic="and " resp=errata></corr>mucilaginous and heavy, tending to allay thirst, and useful in nervous affections; strengthens the system, restores impaired appetite, (is said to moderate an increased secretion of bile,) and improves the complexion. The fruit is of various sizes, from a few drachms to a <pb id=pb2 n=2>pound weight; but it is usually met with weighing about 4 ounces. It becomes acid about a month after the fall of the flower, in which state it is used as preserves, such as jellies, pickles, &amp;c.; at this time, too, it is used as seasoning for <hi>Pilaus</hi>, and other dishes; for when the stone or kernel has become hard, it is no longer fit for these purposes. When the fruit has attained its full growth, and when nearly ripe, it is to be taken from the tree, and put into dry grass, straw, or the leaves of the Palass tree, and there allowed to become ripe; this process deprives it of all acidity, and also prevents the formation of a resinous gum, which it contracts when allowed to ripen on the tree, and which renders it too pungent to be eaten with relish.

<p>The fruit is in perfection in the hot winds, and when the rains commence, it ripens very fast; before the cold weather it is usually out of season.

<p>There are some trees that blossom the whole year, and some few that even produce fruit; but instances of this are very rare.

<p>There is a variety of this tree on which the fruit is sweet from its first formation; this requires to be used early, otherwise it will in all probability become a prey to insects.

<p>Some trees produce fruit only once in 4 years. In general, it produces fruit in abundance every second year, and less in the alternate year; some are even perfectly barren every alternate year.

<p>There is a mode of manuring this tree, which it is said improves the flavour of the fruit greatly; this is mixing the juice of its fruit with milk, and pouring it over the roots. It is also said to be possible to communicate the flavor of any particular fruit to the mangoe, by its expressed juice being made use of, as an application to the roots of the tree.

<p>The kernel of the mangoe, roasted, is pleasant to the taste, and grateful to the stomach; it is much recommended in laxities of the bowels, and strengthens the <hi>primæ viæ</hi>; water drank after having eat of this kernel, seems to possess a flavor peculiarly excellent. The usual mode of preparing them, is to allow them to remain exposed to the rains, till the shell shall have become decayed; by this process it is deprived of any heating or irritating property. <corr sic=Perpared>Prepared</corr> in this manner, and kept a short time in lime juice, taken out, <pb id=pb3 n=3>bruised and mixed with salt, fennel, &amp;c, it is much extolled for strengthening the stomach, and promoting digestion.

<p>If preserved for 3 years, pounded, and swallowed to the quantity of a tolah, with a little water, no medicine is preferable for strengthening bowels habitually lax.

<p>In the acid state, the fruit is very prejudicial to those who have any disorders in their teeth, a cough, an affection of the chest, or who are subject to cholicky pain in the bowels, but very beneficial when used in irritable habits. The best method of using them is this. The acid unripe fruit, after the outer rind has been <corr sic=pealed resp=errata>peeled</corr> off, is to be cut into thin slices, and infused for some hours in water; this water so impregnated, is to be drained off, mixed with a sufficient proportion of sugar, and used as sherbet. It produces a great relish for food, and is in other respects beneficial. The same effects are produced by the unripe fruit, being roasted and allowed to remain in water, as above mentioned. It is recommended in paralysis, from <hi>coup de vent</hi>. Many physicians have considered the mangoe to be of a cooling nature, but, in my opinion, it is heating in all its stages. The Yunani physicians have stated the ripe fruit to be hot in the 2d, and dry in the 3d degree.

<p>Its virtues may be described in a few words. It strengthens the system, gives tone to the <sic corr=kidneys>kidnies</sic><corr sic=" and stone" resp=errata></corr>, restores impaired appetite, &amp;c. It is aperient, improves the complexion, beneficial in piles, an useful deobstruent, braces and increases the bulk of the solids, and removes nervous affections. In some of these disorders I am inclined to doubt of its good effects, but such virtues are attributed to it. It is recommended, in order to prevent any bad effects from the fruit in its unripe state, that raisins be <corr sic=eat>eaten</corr> with it. Hukeem Alwee Khan, a man of eminence in his profession in the reign of Mahommed Shah, says, that if ever this fruit disagreed with the system, it must have been eaten when unripe or green.

<p>I had occasion to attend a gentleman of very high rank, who laboured under dropsy; I cured him of the disease, but 3 years afterwards, having <corr sic=eat>eaten</corr> a large quantity of mangoes, the disease returned, and I have observed the same effects in other cases.

<p>Hukeem Alli Mughphoor, physician, states, that influenced by the resemblance of the mangoe to the human kidney, he concluded <pb id=pb4 n=4>that it must be beneficial in that organ, (disorders of;) he therefore prescribed it in a case of hectic fever, arising from diseased kidney, and completely cured the disease. In this I differ from him entirely; he must have mistaken the nature of the complaint, for a remedy given expressly for the cure of a disease in the kidney, could <hi>not</hi>, at the same time, have removed the fever, excepting appropriate medicines had been administered along with it!!

<p>The best mangoes are those having a thin juice, sweet and free from fibres; and they ought to be cooled in water or in ice, especially during the hot weather. It is preferable to use the juice of the fruit without eating any of the fibrous parts; a neglect of this may produce various disorders, such as indigestion, cholicky pains, &amp;c. It is very common to eat the expressed juice, mixed with sugar and other things, with rice, or with bread, but this is great imprudence; for in the most healthy subjects it may produce nausea, and general uneasiness.

<p>Should any ill effects follow the use of the mangoe, milk, or the kernel of the fruit, will be found a corrector. My father&apos;s opinion is, that these are not the only remedies; for if it produces any heating effect, curdled milk will give relief, or even cold water, or acidulated sherbet, and he himself was always in the habit of using the <hi>Phalsa</hi> sherbet on these occasions.

<p>Should cholic be produced, the Oil of Almonds or other sweet oils, will remove the complaint; and a diarrh&oelig;a is to be cured by the use of the kernel; and a swelling of the abdomen, by milk, in which a little ginger has been mixed; or even ginger by itself will have the effect

<p>A substitute for mangoe, as a medicine, may be had in Chobe Cheenee.

<p>In general, it will be adviseable to abstain from the use of the mangoe, till 2 or 3 showers of rain have fallen; but those of a cold phlegmatic or melancholic temperament do not require to be so particular.

<p>Those for whose complaints mangoes have been recommended, have in a few months derived great benefit from their use, by eating them with camel&apos;s milk. There are many kinds of this fruit, and their names are as various; but the stronger the scent, the <pb id=pb5 n=5>more effectual they are as a medicine. In Persian it is called <hi>Nugzuck</hi>.

<p id=p2><ab type=parNum>2</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aramsheetul</hi> <UR>'A rAm sytl</UR>.&mdash;Pungent and cooling; useful in bilious and catarrhal complaints; also recommended in foulness of the blood.

<p id=p3><ab type=parNum>3</ab> <hi rend=sc>Akaholie</hi> <UR>AkAhUlI</UR>.&mdash;Vermifuge, also recommended in bilious and catarrhal disorders, in seminal weakness and gonorrh&oelig;a.

<p id=p4><ab type=parNum>4</ab> <hi rend=sc>Adki</hi> <UR>AdkI</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Arhir</hi>.

<p id=p5><ab type=parNum>5</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anula</hi> <UR>'AnUlA</UR>. (<hi rend=sc>nasal N.</hi>)&mdash;Or <hi>Amle</hi>, (<hi>Phyllanthus emblica</hi>, W. Murray IV. 127, <hi>Myrobolans</hi>.) The fruit round, like a plum. The tree like that of the tamarind, of a pleasant acid, and sweetish astringent taste. It is aperient, cooling, and drying; of great use in eruptions of the skin, arising from a redundance of bile. Other virtues ascribed to this fruit may be found in all Yunani works. It is also called <hi>Bidjee</hi> and <hi>Dhatri Phill</hi>, used by the natives for cleansing the hair.

<p id=p6><ab type=parNum>6</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aru</hi> <UR>AlU</UR>.&mdash;A variety of plum, much resembling the common sort, both in the tree and fruit; it however possesses more acidity, and is less easy of digestion.

<p id=p7><ab type=parNum>7</ab> <hi rend=sc>Abi</hi> <corr sic="<URA>AlU</URA>" resp=errata><UR>AbI</UR></corr>.&mdash;<hi>Pyrus Cidonia.</hi> The Quince; slightly astringent, and cool in a great degree; heavy and difficult of digestion, yet it is gently laxative and expectorant, and is recommended for strengthening the powers of virility. In Arabic <hi>Siffirjill</hi>, Persian <hi>Behi</hi>.

<p id=p8><ab type=parNum>8</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aak</hi> <UR>'Ak</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Arug</hi>, <hi>Mudar</hi>, <hi>Asclepias gigantea</hi>. A milky shrub, very common all over India; its pod resembles a mangoe, but rather longer in proportion: when ripe it breaks, and is found filled with a white substance, resembling silk, to which the seeds are fixed. The leaves of the plant resemble the <hi>Dak</hi>, but are somewhat smaller: its height is generally from 1 to 1&frac12; yard; when its leaves or stalk are broken, a white milky liquid exudes. There are two kinds, white and red; both are purgatives, violently so. It is said to be beneficial in the following disorders. Foulness of the blood, bilious affections, Juzam, Psora, Zærbad, boils, cuticular eruptions, diseases of the liver, visceral obstructions, hæmorrhoids, <hi>all internal</hi> diseases, dropsy and worms.

<p>(&ldquo;Many and wonderful virtues are ascribed to this plant; but I must refer those who have faith in charms to the original <hi>Taleef <pb id=pb6 n=6>Shereef</hi>, when their curiosity will be amply gratified.&rdquo; Translator.)

<p>All the above virtues have been ascribed to this plant; my opinion is, that the application of the leaves is useful in swellings, promotes suppuration in indolent tumors, and cures eruptions on the skin. The milk blisters, and if applied to the eye, it produces swelling, itchiness, and loss of vision. The powder of the root, mixed with goat&apos;s blood and fresh butter, and applied to the eye, is said materially to strengthen vision. In other works it is said, that the milk of every variety of this plant is poisonous, and violently cathartic.

<p id=p9><ab type=parNum>9</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aal</hi> <UR>'Al</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Mujeet</hi>, <hi>Rubia</hi>, <hi>Madder</hi>, a wood used for dyeing a red color, and forming a principal article of commerce in some parts of India. In the &ldquo;<hi>Dhara Shakoi</hi>&rdquo; it is called <hi>Mujeet</hi>, but I suspect that they are different plants, as the <hi>Mujeet</hi> is thin, and of a fine red color; whereas the <hi>Aal</hi> is blackish, with a tinge of yellow, though not thicker than the other.

<p id=p10><ab type=parNum>10</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aditt Bagut</hi> <UR>Adt b-hgt</UR>.&mdash;In Persian, <hi>Aftab Perust</hi>, <hi>Helianthus Annuus</hi>. The sun-flower; the name of a flower called also <hi>Soorujmookee</hi>. The stem grows straight about a man&apos;s height; the leaves are broad and triangular, the flower circular, flat and yellow, with serrated edges, and it is said to follow the sun in his diurnal progress. There are two kinds, a small and greater; their medical properties the same; they are bitter to the taste, and heating in a considerable degree. It is beneficial in cholicks, dropsical affections, foulness of stomach, and rheumatism; it also improves appetite, and promotes expectoration in cases of cold, accompanied by fever.

<p id=p11><ab type=parNum>11</ab> <hi rend=sc>Area</hi> <UR>ArUI</UR>.&mdash;A culinary fruit resembling the cucumber, and grows in the rainy season; it is so cooling that it produces pains all over the body; it is moreover difficult of digestion, and if taken in any quantity produces fever.

<p id=p12><ab type=parNum>12</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anwul (Nasal)</hi> <UR>AnUl</UR>.&mdash;A large tree very common in India, which when in flower, has a very beautiful appearance; its flowers are yellow, resembling those of the <hi>Cassia</hi>. There are two kinds of this, one called <hi>Mahedi Anwul</hi>. Of this also there are two varieties. It is cooling, and the medicinal properties of all varieties are the same. It is used with good effect in bilious vomitings, and also in <pb id=pb7 n=7>leprous affections of the skin. It is recommended in weakness of the eyes, asthma, affections of the chest, and foulness of blood. It strengthens the weak and emaciated, and braces the solids when relaxed by disease or otherwise.

<p id=p13><ab type=parNum>13</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aruk</hi> <UR>`rq Ark</UR>.&mdash;This name is indiscriminately given to four different kinds of trees; <hi>Nowa</hi>, <hi>Cutel</hi>, <hi>Burhil</hi> and <hi>Taar</hi>.

<p id=p14><ab type=parNum>14</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aloo</hi> (Bochara) <UR>AlU bkhArA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of plum.

<p id=p15><ab type=parNum>15</ab> <hi rend=sc>Abnoos</hi> (Ebony) <UR>AbnUs</UR>.&mdash;A large tree, producing a sweet fruit like grapes. Its leaves resemble those of the <hi>Sinobir</hi>, but are somewhat broader: it is an evergreen, and its wood is, when good and full-grown, dark-colored and durable; its leaves are smooth and glassy; its properties said to be very active and deleterious; it is heating in a considerable degree, and is said to be lithonthriptic. It dispels flatulency, and cures tympanites. It is recommended in chronic affections of the liver. Filings or raspings of the wood are styptic, and its charcoal more so; a decoction of the wood, in spirits, is very effectual in discussing scrophulous tumours, when externally applied.

<p>The raspings of the wood, mixed with whites of eggs, is an excellent application to scalds and burns; they are also famed for cleaning deep foul ulcers, and inducing the growth of healthy granulation.

<p>Taken internally, the dose is 10&frac12; Mashas, and should it disagree with the stomach, which it often does, honey, or Gum Arabic, with sweet basil, are correctors. The large <hi>Baer Tree</hi>, (<hi>Konar</hi><corr sic=",)">),</corr> is a good substitute for the <hi>Abnoos</hi>; quality, hot 3, dry 2. Persian <hi>Awnoos</hi>.

<p id=p16><ab type=parNum>16</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anbihildee</hi> <UR>Anb hldI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Curcuma zedoaria</hi>, (Rox.) <hi>Amomum Zed.</hi> Wildenow. An Indian root, hot and dry in the 2d degree; useful in herpes, and foulness of the blood, and much esteemed as an external application in wounds and bruises, for which it is also internally exhibited: orange juice used as a vehicle, corrects, in some degree, its heating quality; or if this be not procurable, Bapahic, or the seed of the Penwur, or Turmeric, will have the same effect; the medicine may be given to the quantity of 3&frac12; Masha.

<p id=p17><ab type=parNum>17</ab> <hi rend=sc>Apurjeeta</hi> <UR>AprjytA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Clitoria ternatea</hi>, Crow&apos;s beak, a twining shrub. The natives call it <hi>Kowwa Thontee</hi>, which literally signifies <pb id=pb8 n=8>crow&apos;s beak, also <hi>Neelisbund</hi>; the plant is about a foot and a half high, and sometimes less, resembling the <hi>Cungheiy</hi>, only the leaves of the latter are smooth and polished, while those of the former are rough and hard; both the Apurjeeta and the variety Neelisbund, are cooling. It is beneficial in weakness of sight, in clearing the voice and soreness of the throat, and is useful in the poisonous bites of leeches. It is also of use in rheumatic affections of the joints, Juzam, bilious disorders, mucous discharge from the lungs or bowels; it allays general heat, and is said to be an antidote to certain poisonous substances, and of great efficacy in hard indolent tumours, and affections of the skin.

<p id=p18><ab type=parNum>18</ab> <hi rend=sc>Abruc</hi> <UR>'Abrq</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Talc</hi>, A fossil substance, beneficial in seminal weakness, redundance of bile, mucus, &amp;c. An antidote to poison. The physicians of Hindostan prepare it for use by calcination. Arabic, <hi>Tulk</hi>.

<p id=p19><ab type=parNum>19</ab> <hi rend=sc>Abhea</hi> <UR>Ab-hI||</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Hurr</hi>; it also signifies the water of life, and a medicine called <hi>Guloe</hi>.

<p id=p20><ab type=parNum>20</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aotungun</hi> <UR>Atngn</UR>.&mdash;A very common seed, resembling coriander. In powder it is recommended as giving strength to the system, and rendering Aphrodisie more permanent. It is a very favorite medicine in India. It is, moreover, useful in Nephritia and liver complaints, and it is very innocent in its operation. Some physicians describe it as hot and dry, in a considerable degree, and disagreeing with the stomach; they, therefore, recommend it to be taken with a proportion of sugar. In all its properties the <corr sic=Madentuzeerabad>Maadentezerrubad</corr> states the Bonphilly to be nearly the same; dose 4&frac14; Mashas.

<p id=p21><ab type=parNum>21</ab> <hi rend=sc>Atees</hi> <UR>Atys</UR>.&mdash;The root. Of this there are two kinds, a white and black, and both are very common. The white kind resembles the <hi>Jedwaar</hi>; the root is very irregular in thickness. It frequently is found resembling the white <hi>Bahmen</hi>. Both kinds are bitter, astringent, pungent, and heating; aiding digestion, useful in dysentery, vomiting, and piles.

<p id=p22><ab type=parNum>22</ab> <hi rend=sc>Adjmode</hi> <UR>AjmUd</UR>.&mdash;Bishop&apos;s Weed, <hi>Sisson Ammi</hi>, (Linn.) <hi>Amoos</hi>, (Arab.) <hi>Ajooan</hi>, (Hind.) <hi>Nemkha</hi>, P. <hi>Ajamodum</hi>, S. A hot seed, stomachic cordial and stimulant. (<hi>Ajmood</hi>, Parsley? Taylor. <hi>Apium Involucratum.</hi>) <hi>Apium Involucratum</hi>, Rox. M. S. <pb id=pb9 n=9><corr>&ldquo;</corr>Sp. Ch. Annual, glaucous, villous, superior leaflets filiform, both general and partial, involucra, about 6 leaved.&rdquo; Bitter and pungent, light and heating, increases appetite, induces costiveness, and strengthens the vital energy; increases the seminal secretion, and removes pains and other disorders, the consequence of colds; beneficial in nausea, is vermifuge, relieves hiccup, and is useful in Dysuria, but it produces heat in the abdomen. It is called <hi>Curufs</hi>, but it is only a variety of this, and is something betwixt that and Aniseed, though this may be owing to the difference of cultivation.

<p id=p23><ab type=parNum>23</ab> <hi rend=sc>Adjwain</hi> <UR>AjUA'yyn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Anise Seed. In Arabic, <hi>Aneesoon</hi>. <hi>Pimpinella Anisum</hi>, Linn.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Ujwain.</hi> The seed of a plant of the Dill kind, Taylor. <hi>Ligusticum Adjwaen</hi>, Roxb. Sp. Ch. annual, erect, leaves super de compound, with filiform leaflets, ridges and furrows of the seeds distinct and scabrous. This is what is recommended to notice by Dr. Percival, under the name <hi>Ajava</hi> seed.&rdquo;

<p>A species of the above, of which there are two kinds, one of which is called <hi>Juhar</hi>; both are bitter, pungent, and aromatic; it resembles the <hi>Ajmode</hi>, but is smaller, and has a strong aromatic scent. It assists digestion, improves appetite, is useful in rheumatism and catarrhal affections; is vermifuge, beneficial in dropsy, dispels flatulence, and is highly extolled in flatulent cholic. A. <hi>Nanchoa</hi>.

<!-- TODO: brace -->

<p id=p24><ab type=parNum>24</ab> <hi rend=sc>Adjwain</hi> <UR>AjUA'yyn</UR>. <lb id=p25><ab type=parNum>25</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khorasanee</hi> <UR>khr AsAnI</UR>. &ldquo;<hi>Hyosciamus niger</hi>, Linn. Black Henbane. Narcotic. Corrector, Vinegar.&rdquo;

<p>This plant grows thick from the root, and is covered with a hairy down. The seeds are contained within a hard thick shell, and the leaves are like those of the pomegranate flower. The pod is filled with seeds of a small irregular shape. There is a plant called <hi>Hulbeh</hi>, which resembles this, but is smaller. A. <hi>Buzurulbunje</hi>.

<p id=p26><ab type=parNum>26</ab> <hi rend=sc>Adjan</hi> <UR>AjAn</UR>.&mdash;Or <hi>Adjain</hi>, a large tree, with wide spreading branches, in size approaching that of the mangoe; its leaves growing close, and also resembling those of the mangoe tree, but longer and thinner; the fruit is about 1&frac12; foot long, and very thin.

<p id=p27><ab type=parNum>27</ab> <hi rend=sc>Akhroat</hi> <UR>AkhrU't</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The Walnut, <hi>Juglans regia</hi>, Linn.&rdquo; This is a native of hilly countries; its leaves are like the Terpat; the fruit <pb id=pb10 n=10>is sweet to the taste, heating, and heavy; it loosens the bowels, and restores strength; it is useful in rheumatic affections, increases mental energy and the powers of manhood, and gives relief in flying pains in the stomach. A. <hi>Jouz</hi>.

<p id=p28><ab type=parNum>28</ab> <hi rend=sc>Andaluck</hi> <UR>AndAl'k</UR>.&mdash;A kind of grain.

<p id=p29><ab type=parNum>29</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aderuck</hi> <UR>Adrk</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Ginger, <hi>Amomum zinziber</hi>, Linn. <hi>Amomum zinziber</hi>, Wild. <hi>Adraca</hi>, S. <hi>Sonth</hi> (dried root,) H. <hi>Sunthi</hi>, S.&rdquo; A very common root, the stem of which is knotty, and from every knot, a leaf is produced; it is hot and heavy; promotes digestion if eaten before meals, mixed with Lahore salt, (rock salt;) it prevents flatulent swellings in the stomach and bowels. P. <hi>Zinzibeel tur</hi>. It is much extolled as a stomachic when prepared as sweetmeats; but if the syrup be allowed to dry, it spoils, becomes less grateful to the taste, and its heating quality is much increased.

<p id=p30><ab type=parNum>30</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arnee</hi> <UR>ArnI</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree, in height that of the Peach tree, but it is full of branches from the root upwards, and the leaves are like those of the <hi>Sumhaloo</hi>; it is heating, and beneficial in rheumatic complaints and swellings from cold. In the Dhintri it is described as oleaginous and heavy; effectual in Jaundice, increasing appetite, loosening the bowels, and removing flatulence.

<p id=p31><ab type=parNum>31</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arhir</hi> or <hi rend=sc>Toor</hi> <UR>Arhr U tUr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cytisus cajan.</hi>&rdquo; Some consider these as distinct species, but in my opinion <hi>Toor</hi> is only <hi>Arhir</hi> in an overgrown state. The plant grows to the height of a yard and half; and the taste of the pea of the <hi>Arhir</hi> is preferable to that of the <hi>Toor</hi>. <hi>Toor</hi> is sown and cut down at the same time as the sugar-cane; whereas the <hi>Arhir</hi> is sown, and cut with the barley. The pod of the <hi>Toor</hi> is larger than that of the <hi>Arhir</hi>; and the former has an unpleasant smell, which is wanting in the latter; they are both used very commonly as food, all over India. It is in its properties cool and dry, and produces costiveness; it is useful in bilious and catarrhal disorders, and in foulness of the blood. It is even said to be an antidote to poisons. In its taste it is sweet, like that of the <hi>Cassela</hi>. I conceive it hot in the 2d, and dry in the 3d degree, and recommend it for strengthening the stomach. When used as food it is heavy; but is beneficial in complaints having their origin in cold. If twice scalded in hot water, before it is boiled, it will cause less thirst; and if boiled in milk, or whey, it becomes less <pb id=pb11 n=11>heating. A decoction of the leaves is recommended as a wash for the mouth, in cases of toothache, and diseases of the teeth. P. <hi>Shakool</hi>.

<p id=p32><ab type=parNum>32</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aord</hi>, or <hi>Aort</hi>, or <hi>Mash</hi>. <UR>mAsh</UR>.&mdash;vide M. (<hi>Phaseolus Max.</hi>)

<p id=p33><ab type=parNum>33</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arne&apos;</hi> <UR>ArnI</UR>.&mdash;The wild buffaloe. Its flesh recommended in Marasmus. P. <hi>Gowmeche Serhaie</hi>.

<p id=p34><ab type=parNum>34</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arnd</hi> <UR>Arn'd</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The Castor, <hi>Ricinus communis</hi>, W. <hi>Palma Christi</hi>.<corr>&rdquo;</corr> Wildenow says, &ldquo;<foreign lang=la>Planta semper annua, nunquam fructicosa vel arborea, nec in calidissimis terræ plagis liguescit.</foreign>&rdquo; But this is incorrect; for the plant is perennial, and becomes a moderate sized tree. The natives, however, have a prejudice against allowing it to grow beyond 3 or 4 years, and even this is only in solitary places. The chief reason I fancy is, that it interferes with the cultivation of the soil, if permitted to remain. They usually sow it with grain, and reap the grain crop before it has attained its full height; this they can do annually, but seed sown under its shelter the second year, would not succeed.

<p>A shrub, with broad soft leaves, like the fig tree; it grows about 6 or 8 feet in height; the root is hollow, and without flaw or wrinkle; the seed grows in bunches like grapes, and the shell of the pod, which resembles gall-nuts, is covered with soft prickles. The seed is like the coffee bean, and is stained with different colored spots, so as to appear like marbled paper; the kernel is white, soft, and oleaginous. There are two kinds of this; one with a red, the other with a green pod; the former is culled <hi>Jongia Arnde</hi>; both varieties are sweet, heating, and heavy. The oil of the kernel is useful in removing obstinate constrictions of the intestines, when given warm; also in flatulency; rheumatic swellings of the joints and lumbago; in strangury, spasms in the urinary bladder, headaches, dropsy, and feverish complaints. It is also recommended as an expectorant in difficulty of breathing, and in cough; in affections of the skin, and in superabundance of mucus in the intestines. It is a warm, stimulating purgative; the dose one or two table spoonsful. Both my father, uncle, and I, have used it with great success, in cases of obstinate cholic from costiveness. They also used the leaves moistened with <hi>ghee</hi>, as an external application in rheumatic pains and swellings. If the seeds are bruised, and mixed with curdled milk, and allowed to remain in this state till <pb id=pb12 n=12>they become putrid, they form an excellent application for the cure of itch, and usually succeed in 7 or 8 days. It has also been said, that if one of the kernels be taken at first, and daily increased by one, till 100 are taken, and then decreased in the same gradual manner, it will cure Juzam, and other kinds of Leprosy.

<p id=p35><ab type=parNum>35</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arusa</hi> <UR>"ArUsA</UR>.&mdash;A name for the <hi>Baan Tree</hi>; vide <hi>Bansa</hi>. In the <corr sic=Maadentezerubad>Maadentezerrubad</corr>, it is thus described:&mdash;<hi>Arusa</hi> is a medicine of Hindoostan, hot and moist, or in the opinion of some writers, cool and moist, in the 2d degree: half an ounce of the juice, with as much honey, is a cure for hoarseness, or loss of voice; and used with the fruit of the Peepul tree, it increases appetite, and corrects mucous discharges. A decoction of the leaves in water, is useful in Jaundice, difficulty of breathing, Gonorrh&oelig;a, and hectic fever. As a gargle it strengthens the gums; and the leaves bruised, and taken in honey or water, cure Epistaxis, H&oelig;matemesis, Nausea, Vertigo, and Suppression of the menses.

<p id=p36><ab type=parNum>36</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arjun</hi> <UR>A'rjn</UR>.&mdash;A tree, also the fruit; hot and astringent; useful in bilious affections, and in prostration of strength from fatigue, and an antidote to poisons. Its use is interdicted in disorders arising from cold; also in ulcers: but externally applied it cleanseth foul sores, and promotes healthy granulation. It prolongs Aphrodisia, strengthens the system, and expedites the union of divided parts. Some physicians call it cooling. <hi>Pentaptera Arjuna.</hi>

<p id=p37><ab type=parNum>37</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arloo</hi>, <hi>Catoombura</hi>, or <hi>Sheunag</hi>, <UR>ArlU</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree, a native of the hills; it is pungent, beneficial in loosening phlegm, and promoting appetite; it produces costiveness, and is vermifuge, and recommended in Juzam. It is an ingredient in the <hi>Dusmool</hi>.

<p id=p38><ab type=parNum>38</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arvie</hi>, or <hi>Arum Colocasia</hi>, <UR>'ArUI</UR>.&mdash;A root and seed. It is about 3 inches long, more or less, and when the outer rind is removed it is white. Its stem is about 3 feet in height; its leaves large like a shield, with the points reflected; in consistence and polish it is like the plaintain leaf. It is also called Cutchaloo, but the different names are only applied with propriety to different parts of the same root; the <hi>Cutchaloo</hi> being more like a <hi>Byngun</hi> or Egg-plant. They are both in general use in India. The <hi>Arvie</hi> is dressed with meat, and the <hi>Cutchaloo</hi> is roasted; the leaves and shoots are also commonly eaten. Its properties, I can declare from experience, <pb id=pb13 n=13>are in a small degree cool; and it is useful in giving strength to the system; prevents the involuntary emission of semen; it produces wind, and is heavy and hurtful to the throat Its corrector is acids, and being repeatedly washed in water. The <hi>Cutchaloo</hi> is the most powerful, and the most hurtful of the two kinds. A. <hi>Culdass</hi>, at least it is so stated; but in the Yunani works, there is a material difference; as the <hi>Culdass</hi> is described, therefore, it is doubtful to me whether they are one and the same.

<p id=p39><ab type=parNum>39</ab> <hi rend=sc>Armeede</hi>, <UR>ArmydI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of cucumber.

<p id=p40><ab type=parNum>40</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aorde Gunta</hi> <UR>ArdI g-hn'tA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Satawur</hi>.

<p id=p41><ab type=parNum>41</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aistullkund</hi> <UR>Astl knd</UR>.&mdash;The name of a root; also called <hi>Giràmkund</hi>; also a variety of the medicine <hi>Maankund</hi>: it promotes phlegm, and corrects bile and wind; it is also useful in foulness of the blood and general swellings. The other kind is useful in foulness of blood, and in bilious affections; it is sweet, cool, and heavy. It is likewise called <hi>Istolékund</hi>.

<p id=p42><ab type=parNum>42</ab> <hi rend=sc>Asperuck</hi> <UR>Asprk</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Akléel ul Mulk</hi>.

<p id=p43><ab type=parNum>43</ab> <hi rend=sc>Asgund</hi> <UR>Asknd</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Physalis flexuosa.</hi> A very common white root, also called <hi>Asgund&apos;h</hi>, about half a yard long, like the sweet potatoe, (<hi>Convolvulus batatas</hi>.) When thin and dry, it resembles the <hi>Shúkákul mysrie</hi>, (carrot;) its leaves are very like those of the <hi>kuth</hi>, (<hi>Mimosa catechu</hi>,) but rather less. It grows about a yard along the ground; its taste is astringent and bitter; it is hot, and strengthens the powers of virility; removes bilious and mucous affections; is beneficial in general swellings, and white leprosy.

<p>Some give this name to the <hi>Kaknej</hi>, or Winter Cherry. In the <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi>, it is thus described. <hi>Asgund</hi> is a medicine of Hindoostan; the best sort of which is procurable at Nagour. It is hot and dry in the 1st degree. The people of India use in its stead, the <hi>Soorinjan</hi>, (the <hi>Hermodactylus</hi>.) It is especially beneficial in pains of the joints. The root, when arrived at perfection, has a strong scent of the horse; from which circumstance it has in India, derived its name; Asp, signifying the horse, and Gund, smell: it is also called <hi>Bajecund</hi>.

<p>If 3 drachms of the root be boiled in 2 pounds of cow&apos;s milk, and 1 ounce of sugar mixed with it, and this taken for 14 days, it increases peculiar secretions, and improves the complexion.

<pb id=pb14 n=14><p id=p44><ab type=parNum>44</ab> <hi rend=sc>Asphill</hi> <UR>Asp-hl</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Padmunie</hi>, a variety of <hi>Kunwul</hi>. The Lotus, (<hi>Nymphæa Nelumbo</hi>,) which is produced on dry land. It is sweet, bitterish, and cool; is useful in vomiting, Diarrh&oelig;a, and foulness of the blood.

<p id=p45><ab type=parNum>45</ab> <hi rend=sc>Astull</hi> <UR>Astl</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Buntàki</hi>, a name for <hi>Buratha</hi>; it means a large <hi>Byngun</hi>, or Egg-fruit; the plant being the same.

<p id=p46><ab type=parNum>46</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aspurka</hi> <UR>Asprk</UR>.&mdash;Cool and light; promotes peculiar secretions, and is useful in various disorders: it removes offensive exhalations; moderates profuse sweats; is beneficial in dropsy; restores strength; cures emaciation; and is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p47><ab type=parNum>47</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aoshire</hi> <UR>"Asyr</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Kuss kuss.</hi> <hi>Ooseer?</hi> <hi>Andropogon muricatum</hi>, K&oelig;nig. A name for <hi>Kuss kuss</hi>. In the <hi>Dara Shekoi</hi>, it is called <hi>Aosire</hi>, and is described as the root of the grass <hi>kuss</hi>, with which houses are made cool in the hot weather. It is cool, and assists digestion, cures laxity of the bowels, and is useful in bilious affections, foulness of blood, and superabundance of mucus; allays thirst, is a grateful application to blistered parts, or where much heat is experienced; beneficial in difficulty of voiding urine, in boils and eruptions, and prolongs aphrodisia.

<p id=p48><ab type=parNum>48</ab> <hi rend=sc>Asteghoon</hi> <UR>AstgxUn</UR>.&mdash;An article of food, made by mixing one part of <hi>Moong</hi>, with two parts of rice, boiling them together, and pouring off the water, with which is to be mixed rock salt, assaf&oelig;tida, coriander, ginger, and peepul. This is an excellent drink in fevers, in bilious affections, and foulness of the blood; it increases appetite, and clears, and gives tone to the kidnies and bladder.

<p id=p49><ab type=parNum>49</ab> <hi rend=sc>Apheem</hi> <UR>AfyUn</UR><!-- Persian correct-->.&mdash;(<hi>Papaver somniferum</hi>.) Of this there are four kinds; the 1st, which is white, is called <hi>Chaarun</hi>, (promoting digestion;) the 2d, <hi>Maarun</hi>, is black; the 3d yellow, and the 4th, of all these colours mixed, called <hi>Saarun</hi>. Its properties are well known, and fully detailed in all Yunani works on medicine.

<p id=p50><ab type=parNum>50</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aginmunt</hi> <UR>Agn mnt</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Agwunt.</hi> Names of <hi>Arnee</hi>; q. vide.

<p id=p51><ab type=parNum>51</ab> <hi rend=sc>Agust</hi> <UR>Agst</UR>.&mdash;(<hi>Æschynomene Grandiflora.</hi>) A tree, cool and dry, producing flatulence, curing bile, foulness of blood, and mucus; also fever. Its flowers beneficial in improving the sense of smelling, and in night blindness.

<p id=p52><ab type=parNum>52</ab> <hi rend=sc>Akroat</hi> <UR>AkrU't</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Akhroat</hi>.

<pb id=pb15 n=15><p id=p53><ab type=parNum>53</ab> <hi rend=sc>Akirkirra</hi> <UR>Aqrqr-hA</UR>.&mdash;or <hi>Akirkirrhà</hi>, (<hi>Dranculus</hi>.) In Yunani works called discutient and alternant.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Anthemis Pyrethrum</hi>, Linn. Pelletory of Spain, Ainslie. Off. The Root. <hi>Pyrethre</hi>, (F.) <hi>Eaher Wustrell</hi>, (G.) <hi>Akkárácárum</hi>, (Tam.) Powerful stimulant, useful as a sialagogue, to excite an increased flow of saliva; hence useful in headache, rheumatism of the face, toothache, in paralysis of the tongue and muscles of the throat.&rdquo;

<p id=p54><ab type=parNum>54</ab> <hi rend=sc>Agur</hi> <UR>AkUr</UR>.&mdash;Dry and light, useful in affections of the eyes; it also promotes the secretion of bile. A. <hi>Oodh</hi>.

<p id=p55><ab type=parNum>55</ab> <hi rend=sc>Agunie Char</hi> <UR>AknI k-hAr</UR>.&mdash;Pungent and very hot. In rheumatic affections of the chest, <hi>Soonpat</hi> from mucus, and rheumatic pains in the joints, it is highly beneficial. This medicine is the produce of the western provinces of India; and the best kind is red, and feels hot to the touch; it is found by the sides of rivers.

<p id=p56><ab type=parNum>56</ab> <hi rend=sc>Akasbele</hi> <corr sic="<URA>Aks byly</URA>" resp=errata><UR>AkAs bylx"h</UR></corr>.&mdash;<hi>Cuscuta reflexa</hi>, a name for <hi>Afteemoon</hi>, (Dodder of Thyme.)

<p id=p57><ab type=parNum>57</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alsi</hi> <UR>'Alsy</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Linum Usitatissimum</hi>, W. <hi>Atasi</hi>, S. <hi>Tesi</hi>, H. Emollient and demulcent.&rdquo; Grows about 1&frac12; foot high; its leaves are thin, and its flower of the color of Lapis lazuli. In India it is supposed to decrease the secretion of semen, and to weaken sight; it is hot, and said to be discutient; it is useful in phlegm from cold. A. <hi>Buzzúrkatan</hi>.

<p id=p58><ab type=parNum>58</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aoloo</hi> <UR>"AlU</UR>.&mdash;The owl. Those who eat its flesh may expect to be deprived of all reasoning faculties, with loss of memory. It produces much wind, and is called in Persian, Boom.

<p>The women of India frequently give it to their husbands, that by the mental weakness it produces, they may obtain more liberty of conduct than might otherwise be agreeable.

<p id=p59><ab type=parNum>59</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alaechee</hi> <UR>AlAychy</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Kakla</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Amomum Cardamomum</hi>, Wild. <hi>Amomum Repens</hi>, Wood, vol. II. p. 356.&rdquo; It is of two kinds, and very common. The tree is very large, its leaves resemble those of the sugar cane, of the length of a man; it is very fragrant, and both kinds are nearly alike in properties. The physicians of India call it moderately cool, aromatic, and bitter; and that it is useful in bilious affections, rheumatic complaints, and superabundance of mucus; it is likewise said to decrease Aphrodisia, and to be prejudicial <pb id=pb16 n=16>in affections of the chest The large kind possesses all these properties in a greater degree than the small; &ldquo;the latter is called the <hi>Guzerattee Alaechee</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p60><ab type=parNum>60</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alta</hi> <UR>AltA</UR>.&mdash;A name for the Lac colour.

<p id=p61><ab type=parNum>61</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amulbedh</hi> <UR>Amlbyd"h</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Amulbenth</hi>, a very acid fruit of India; the tree much resembles the lime tree, but is rather larger. It is so very acid, that it will, in a few minutes, dissolve a needle, or small shell. It is light and aperient; improves decayed appetite; is cardiac; removes visceral obstructions, and increases all the secretions. I have been accustomed to take out part of the pulp of the fruit, and to fill the empty space with such medicines as assist digestion, and correct disorders of the digestive organs, in a pounded state, and allowing the fruit, thus medicated, to dry, and using it under the title of <hi>Amulbedh</hi>. It is brought in quantities from Jeynugger, and Ruttunboil. A spurious sort of this is made from the large lemon, and sold in its stead. I have found it useful in promoting digestion, giving relief in rheumatism, and as an aperient (<hi>Amul</hi> means acid.)

<p id=p62><ab type=parNum>62</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amulchangerie</hi> <UR>Aml chA'ngrI</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;An acid fruit, from a plant of India, called <hi>Changerie</hi>, much resembling the In-ubassaleb, (<hi>Nightshade</hi>,) and grows about 8 inches high, or more, and is about as much expanded. Its properties are hot, light, and stomachic; it promotes digestion, and is beneficial in Piles and Juzam; it cures laxities of the bowels, and decreases all the secretions, except bile.

<p id=p63><ab type=parNum>63</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amlie</hi> <UR>Amly</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Tamarindus Indicus</hi>. A large tree; the fruit and leaves off it are very small, growing from both sides of a centre stem; they close up at night, and are expanded during the day. The fruit resembles a bean-pod, bent in the centre, and usually less than 8 inches in length; it bends so as to assume the figure of a semi-circle, but often not so much. The Author of the Book Tophut-ul-Momeneen, describes the tree as resembling the Pomegranate tree; but I suspect he had never seen it. It is acid and heavy, removes flatulence, but increases bile and blood.

<p>When ripe, it is laxative, promotes appetite, and is beneficial in oppression after meals. It is dry, light, cardiac, and restores prostration of strength from fatigue. It removes nausea, giddiness, thirst, and general heat. Sherbet prepared from it, should it agree <pb id=pb17 n=17>with the stomach, is preferable to any other, and prevents the noxious influence of the hot winds on the system. The kind which is red, ought to be chosen for preserves, and it possesses all the properties of the fresh fruit. The flowers of the tamarind eat with meat, increase its flavor; they also prevent accumulation of bile, are aperient, and increase appetite; but they are improper when acidity prevails in the stomach.

<p id=p64><ab type=parNum>64</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amrutphull</hi> <UR>Amrt p-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name given to the sweet lime. Vide <hi>Rajeneemb</hi>.

<p id=p65><ab type=parNum>65</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ambarae</hi> <UR>AnbrA'yI</UR>.&mdash;A fruit, the produce of the hills, large and acid.

<p id=p66><ab type=parNum>66</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amarbele</hi> <UR>AmArbylI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Afteemoon</hi> (<hi>Dodder Thyme</hi>.)

<p id=p67><ab type=parNum>67</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amroude</hi> <UR>AmrUd</UR>.&mdash;(<hi>Guava.</hi>) An Indian fruit resembling the pear. It is full of small seeds, and is of an unpleasant smell; its tree resembles the mulberry, but is smaller; the leaves are like the leaf of the mangoe, green, with a tinge of red, and the veins of the leaf are strongly marked. The fruit is pendant, and its shape pyramidal. It is also called <hi>Suffryam</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Psidium pyriferum</hi>.&rdquo; It strengthens the stomach, produces costiveness, and is astringent. I have given it with good effect in laxities of the bowels.

<p id=p68><ab type=parNum>68</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amratuck</hi> <UR>AmrAtk</UR>.&mdash;The name of a culinary vegetable.

<p id=p69><ab type=parNum>69</ab> <hi rend=sc>Amultas</hi> <UR>AmltAs</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Kurwara</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Cassia Fistula</hi>, W. <hi>Sauvernaca</hi>, S. <hi>Casse</hi>, F. <hi>Rohnkassie</hi>, G. The pulp of its fruit laxative.&rdquo; Its flowers are dressed, and eaten with meat; and it has the virtue of giving it additional flavor, and loosening the bowels.

<p id=p70><ab type=parNum>70</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ananass</hi> <UR>An-nAs</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;Called also <hi>Kutel Sufrie</hi>, (The <hi>Pineapple</hi>,) for this reason, that if the plant is carried along with a person proceeding on a journey, it will produce fruit. It is about the size of the large lime, called <hi>Turunje</hi>; its color yellow, tinged with red; its surface is irregular, and covered with small prickles; its smell like that of the mangoe, and very pleasant; the whole plant, including the fruit, is about a yard in height; the leaves have <corr sic=serratted>serrated</corr> edges, and the fruit grows perpendicular. On the top of the stem there is a bunch of leaves growing from the top of the fruit, which if broken off, and planted, is reproductive. It bears fruit only once, and only one fruit at a time. I have not seen its properties noticed in any work, but the people of India call it cooling. It was <pb id=pb18 n=18>first described by <hi>Abul Fuzul</hi>, in the <hi>Ayen Akberry</hi>; and this was afterwards copied by the Author of the <hi>Dhara Shekoih</hi>, from which others have copied it. Part of this description I have copied, and from my own observation have added the remainder. In my opinion it is hot in a small degree, and moist in the 2d degree. Its use is grateful to the system, and it gives strength to the intellectual powers, also tone to the stomach. It is injurious to the throat, to the solids, to respiration, and to the intestines; but its corrector is sugar, and if it be sliced, put in rose water to which sugar is added, and allowed to stand for some time, its beneficial properties are increased, while its injurious qualities are prevented or corrected. A preserve made from it, is excellent, and is used with stews and Pilau, as giving them great additional relish.

<p id=p72><ab type=parNum>72</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ambeloona</hi> <UR>AnblUnA</UR>.&mdash;A fruit of Hindoostan, acid and astringent, cool and producing costiveness, beneficial in mucus and bile; also in carbuncle, and other tumors and affections of the throat.

<p id=p73><ab type=parNum>73</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ambegool</hi> <UR>AnbghUl</UR> or <hi>Angool</hi>, or <hi>Ambegooda</hi>; called also <hi>Inderain Soorkh</hi>. (Vide the next article.) A plant whose taste is bitter and astringent; it is hot and moist, light and purgative, beneficial in flatulence, mucus, and general swellings. It is vermifuge, and removes pains in the bowels. It is an antidote to poisons, and removes disorders produced by indigestion. The fruit of the plant is sweet and cool, heavy and purgative, useful in affections from wind, bile, and disorders of the blood; it removes general heat, and is beneficial in Marasmus. It decreases the seminal secretion, increases mucus, and strengthens the system. <hi>Nourdi Mahommed</hi> says, that in the epidemic carbuncle which affects the armpit or throat, this fruit is given with more success than any other medicine; and that one fruit given internally, and another applied to the part, will cure the disease, should there be any stamina remaining in the system. He also says, that if ten pounds of this fruit be steeped for a week in Anula water, taken out and dried, put into a mill, and the oil expressed, and this oil introduced into the nose for 8 days successively, white hair will become black. He writes much more respecting its virtues; but as I have had no experience of them, and cannot vouch for the effect, I forbear to transcribe them.

<pb id=pb19 n=19><p id=p74><ab type=parNum>74</ab> <hi rend=sc>Inderain</hi> <UR>AndrAyn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cucumis Colocynthus.</hi> Wild Gourd. Bitter cucumber. It is said by <hi>Thunberg</hi> to be rendered so perfectly mild, by being pickled, as to be used as food at the Cape of Good Hope.&rdquo; The fruit of a plant like the small melon, and very bitter; the plant too resembles that of the melon, and in Persian it is called the bitter melon. There are two kinds of this, one I have already described under the head of the preceding article. Both are bitter, powerful, hot, light, and purgative; a cure for Jaundice, useful in bilious and mucous affection, diseases of the spleen, dropsy and fever: they are also vermifuge.

<p>In menstrual suppression the following is said to be effectual.

<p>Of the root of <hi>Inderain Soorkh</hi> 1 pice weight, pepper 14 grains in number; bruise, and give in water: effectual in two or three days.

<p>Also the following is used by the natives; bitter Toombric seed, <hi>Jawakhar</hi>, Goor, <hi>Mynphill</hi>, in equal parts, mixed with the milk of the prickly pear, and formed into a tent; applied to the Os Uteri for 3 days, it will produce fever.

<p id=p75><ab type=parNum>75</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anderjow</hi> <UR>AndrjU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Nerium Anti-dysentericum</hi>, <hi>Echites Anti-dysenterica</hi>, (Roxb. MS.) <hi>Curaya</hi>, H. <hi>Cutaja</hi>, S.<corr>&rdquo;</corr> A large tree, with leaves like the almond tree; it produces a fruit long and broad, which grow separate from each other. The fruit contains a number of seeds, rather longer than those of the melon, and resembling a bird&apos;s tongue. The pulp of the fruit is of a yellowish white, but the seeds are red. Its properties are bitter, pungent, cool, and astringent. It cures flatulence, bile, and fever, is vermifuge, and is useful in piles, and beneficial in that kind of carbuncle the matter of which is infectious: there are two kinds of this, a bitter and a sweet sort: of these, the bitter is to be preferred. In Hemorrhoids, where much blood is discharged, if taken in the quantity of half a tolah daily, in cold water, for eight days, the cure will be accomplished. The bark of the tree, taken in cold water, will remove laxities of the bowels.

<p id=p76><ab type=parNum>76</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anar</hi> <UR>AnAr</UR><corr>.&mdash;</corr>A name for <hi>Darim</hi>, q. vide. &ldquo;<hi>Punica Granatum</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p77><ab type=parNum>77</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aunalie</hi> <UR>AnAlI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Shakakool</hi>, (<hi>Wild Carrot</hi>.)

<p id=p78><ab type=parNum>78</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ambaray</hi> <UR>AnbArAy</UR>.&mdash;or <hi>Ambara</hi>, a vegetable used by the poorer classes, resembling <hi>Sunn</hi> (hemp.) When young, it is hot, heavy, <pb id=pb20 n=20>and promotes appetite; it is useful in flatulence, and loosens the belly: when ripe it is sweet and cool, and increases seminal secretion. In the <hi>Dunterie</hi> it is written, that it is oleaginous and astringent.

<p id=p79><ab type=parNum>79</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ankaloon</hi> <UR>AnkAlUn</UR>.&mdash;The name of a salt called also <hi>Oodoobudh</hi>. Vide <hi>Loon</hi>.

<p id=p80><ab type=parNum>80</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anbertasung</hi> <UR>Anbr tAsng</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Sungbusserie</hi>.

<p id=p81><ab type=parNum>81</ab> <hi rend=sc>Angud</hi> <UR>Angd</UR>.&mdash;The name for <hi>Hungoot</hi>, q. vide.

<p id=p82><ab type=parNum>82</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anjeer</hi> <UR>Anjyr</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;<hi>Ficus Carica.</hi> The Fig. A common fruit. Its virtues are fully pointed out in Persian works. Another variety, called <hi>Anjeer Deshtee</hi>, (Adam&apos;s fig,) <hi>Keonberrie</hi>. Some writers call the fig hot, others describe it as cool, like the Goolur.

<p id=p83><ab type=parNum>83</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aaont</hi> <UR>'AUn't</UR>.&mdash;The Camel. The flesh is sweet to the taste, and light; it increases the strength of vision and dispels flatulence, kills larvæ in the stomach, useful in piles, and increases bile and mucus: in P. <hi>Shootur</hi>.

<p id=p84><ab type=parNum>84</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aoode Belao</hi> <UR>"AUd blA'u</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Lutre Lutreola</hi>, (Shaw.) The Otter? An animal, named also Kunduss, called in P. <hi>Saqeabi</hi>. Its scrotum is called <hi>Jeunel bedesther</hi>. Its properties fully related in all Yunani publications.

<p id=p85><ab type=parNum>85</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aoont Kutara</hi> <UR>"AUn't k'tArA</UR>.&mdash;A prickly shrub, about a yard high; both leaves and branches are full of prickles, and its flowers are yellow; its fruit round, and also full of prickles. It is bitter and pungent, useful in phlegm and cough, also wind; increases bile, and is diuretic; it promotes digestion, and increases the strength of the system. If the fresh root be cut into small pieces, and the oil extracted from it by heat, and this oil to the quantity of one masha, rubbed over a plaintain leaf, and externally applied, it will increase Aphrodisia, and lengthen its duration. This oil, applied to the parts, will restore strength. Its application will also remove an offensive effluvia from the axillæ. <hi>Echinops Echinatus</hi>, (Roxb.)

<p id=p86><ab type=parNum>86</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aoonk</hi> <UR>"AUn'k</UR>.&mdash;A plant, a yard or more in height, whose leaves are about 2 inches in breadth, and hard like the leaves of the Mocao; its flower is prickly, and its seed very small, even smaller than the Powar, which it resembles. There are two kind: the branches of one red, the other white; both bitter, and promoters of digestion, <pb id=pb21 n=21>decreasing mucus and wind, removing flatulent swellings in the stomach or bowels, and pains therein; useful in piles and Psora.

<p id=p87><ab type=parNum>87</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ahmlee</hi> <UR>AhmlI</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Buzuroolreshad</hi>.

<p id=p88><ab type=parNum>88</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aegoor</hi> <UR>AbghUr</UR>.&mdash;Powerfully astringent and bitter, easy of digestion, beneficial in disorders of blood, bile, mucus, and also in <hi>Juzam</hi>, an antidote to poison, and strengthening eye sight. P. <hi>Shingirff</hi>. (Cinnabar?)

<p id=p89><ab type=parNum>89</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aechill</hi> <UR>Aychl</UR>.&mdash;The name of a reed.

<p id=p90><ab type=parNum>90</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aent</hi> <UR>Ayn't</UR>.&mdash;(Brick.) In P. <hi>Khysht</hi>. When the seminal secretion is too thin, this is given with success; the older kind is preferred in medicine. In the <hi>Tophutul Momeneen</hi> and other works, its virtues are described.


<div1 id=beh>
<head><UR>b, p</UR></head>


<p id=p91><ab type=parNum>91</ab> <hi rend=sc>Padill</hi> <UR>bAdl</UR>.&mdash;Sometimes called <hi>Patill</hi>, and another kind denominated <hi>Kashta Padill</hi> or <hi>Kut Padill</hi>. Of this also there is another kind, but as the properties of all are the same, I have not particularly distinguished them from each other. It is the flower of an Indian tree, which in size is equal to the Mangoe or Jamin, its pod is 1&frac12; feet long, and 4 fingers in breadth, formed of different layers, and lined with a soft cottony substance. The seed resembles that of the <hi>Seriss</hi> tree, and its taste is astringent, sweet, and its properties mixed, cool and hot. It is beneficial in swellings of a general nature, in foulness of the blood, in difficulty of breathing, in thirst, nausea, and loss of appetite. Its flowers correct all the natural secretions, and remove bilious laxity of the bowels, and heartburn. The pod relieves hiccup, and corrects bilious and mucous secretions; some have described its properties as cool, and the Dhuntri recommends the first kind, as the one to be preferred for internal use.

<p id=p92><ab type=parNum>92</ab> <hi rend=sc>Paá</hi> <UR>pA||</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Sulphur Zinci</hi>, a name for <hi>Zaje Suffed</hi>. It resembles the Shibbi Yemani, but of a more yellow tinge, and less transparent, but its pungency and astringency greater; placed in the fire it becomes sublimed; its nature hot and dry. If a cloth is wetted with its solution, and allowed to dry, and then placed in the vagina, it dries the part, and lessens its diameter.

<p id=p93><ab type=parNum>93</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beekhbans</hi> <UR>byj bns</UR> or <hi>Beedjbans</hi>.&mdash;A kind of green bamboo, shot as arrows by the Nepaulese, and which poison the wound they inflict.

<pb id=pb22 n=22><p id=p94><ab type=parNum>94</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bansa</hi> <UR>pAnsA</UR>.&mdash;Called also Piábansa. Some say that it is the name of the <hi>Baadawurd</hi> tree; however this may be, it is the name of a very common tree, found in plains and waste places; it grows about the height of a man, more or less; has spreading branches, which grow out of its stem even to the root: its leaves are thin, small, and pointed, when the tree is young; but they increase in size as the tree grows, and become like those of the Jamin. Its flowers are white, with prickles on their stalk. The other kind called <hi>Pia Bansa</hi> has colored flowers.

<p>It increases wind, and clears the throat; it removes disorders of bile, mucus, or blood, cough, difficulty of breathing, nausea, fever, seminal weakness, juzam, and marasmus. A tooth-brush made of its wood, materially strengthens the gums and teeth, and of this many have had experience. It strengthens the system, darkens the color of the hair, cures the itch, and is an antidote to poison. In its nature it is hot, and is useful in eruptions of the skin and leprosy.

<p>In the <hi><corr sic=Maadentuzurrubad>Maadentezerrubad</corr></hi>, that with the yellow flowers, is called <hi>Pia Bansa</hi>, and the tree is said to be about a yard high, with long leaves, hot, cool, and dry in an equal degree; a decoction of the root is beneficial as a gargle in toothache, or with the addition of the leaves, as a gargle in ptyalism.

<p id=p95><ab type=parNum>95</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baluka</hi> <UR>bAlUkA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Cucumis Madraspatanus.</hi> A species of Kitcherie; it is also called <hi>Kootoombur</hi>. <hi>Phoont</hi> is likewise a variety of this, and is in Persian named <hi>Dustoombaóyé</hi>. When unripe, its taste is sweet; it is cool, and heavy, removes eruptions of the skin from bile, and when ripe, it is hot, light, aperient, creating appetite, and bile.

<p id=p96><ab type=parNum>96</ab> <hi rend=sc>Palewut</hi> <UR>pAl U't</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Palook</hi>, a medicine of India. The first is sweet, hot, and cool, in an equal degree; it is heavy, and corrects bile and wind. The second kind, also called <hi>Malook</hi>, is sweeter than the first, and in all its properties resembling <hi>Padill</hi>, except that it produces less thirst.

<p id=p97><ab type=parNum>97</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baraykund</hi> <UR>bArAI kn'd</UR> or <hi>Keetkuroódh</hi>, or <hi>Subbuzkund</hi>.&mdash;The produce of a wet or moist soil. Its capsule is thick and hard; it is sweet, bitter, pungent, and increases the powers of manhood, and generally strengthens the system; it increases bile, but removes <pb id=pb23 n=23>a superabundance of phlegm or wind. It is vermifuge, and useful in seminal weakness. Its leaves used as greens, create appetite, improve the complexion, and are beneficial in Juzam. I have ascertained from several books of Hindoostan, that it is a species of <hi>Russain</hi>, and that <hi>Barayokand</hi> and <hi>Bedareekund</hi> are one and the same plant; but some books state the contrary.

<p id=p98><ab type=parNum>98</ab> <hi rend=sc>Banjkakóra</hi> <UR>bAnj kAkU'rA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, of a light nature, beneficial in mucous affections, antidote to poison, useful in boils and wounds, also in sores; called in Persian <hi>Khora</hi>. One kind of this bears no fruit, hence its name <hi>Banja</hi>.

<p id=p99><ab type=parNum>99</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pakur</hi> <UR>pAk'r</UR>.&mdash;A large tree, beautiful in appearance, as large as the <hi>Jamin</hi>. The leaves also resemble the <hi>Jamin</hi>, but broader, longer, and thicker; its fruit is yellow, and when ripe, like the apple, but when small, it is more like the peach; it is cooling, and cures boils, eruptions of the skin, and is effectual in mucous and bilious affections, it also allays swelling in wounds. The fruit bears the same name; it is acid, its sherbet cardiac, promotes appetite, and decreases bile. By some called <hi>Pakull</hi>.

<p id=p100><ab type=parNum>100</ab> <hi rend=sc>Panee Amluk</hi> <UR>PAnI Amlk</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of Hindoostan, hot and heavy; it cures flatulency, and when ripe, it increases the bilious and mucous secretions.

<p id=p101><ab type=parNum>101</ab> <hi rend=sc>Paadae</hi> <UR>pAAdAI</UR>.&mdash;Pungent and bitter, hot and light, cures wind, bile, Juzam, and fever; vomiting, dropsy, affections of the heart, general heat, itch, disorders from poison, difficulty of breathing, and is vermifuge. It also cures <hi>Badgola</hi>, boils and eruptions of the skin, and removes laxities of the bowels.

<p id=p102><ab type=parNum>102</ab> <hi rend=sc>Babchee</hi> <UR>bAbchI</UR> or <hi>Bakchee</hi>, an Indian medicine, the seed of which is black; it is beneficial in every kind of leprosy, and in every pain of the stomach; it is used both internally and externally. I have used 2 mashas of this, with other appropriate medicines, infused in water for a night, strained and given as a drink to those affected with white leprosy, and other affections of the same nature; and have used the strained refuse externally, with the greatest success. It is pungent and aromatic, hot and dry in the 3d deg. light and cardiac, creates appetite, and cures affections of bile and mucus; but is prejudicial to the eyesight, and lessens the seminal secretion.

<pb id=pb24 n=24><p>In the <hi><corr sic="Maader Tezerrubad">Maadentezerrubad</corr></hi> it is written, that <hi>Babchee</hi> is a seed about the size of gram, or rather less, of a dark color, and aromatic flavor, hot and dry in a small degree, cures wind, mucus, and Juzam; the itch and other eruptions of the skin when discoloration or ulceration takes place, and all complaints arising from foulness of blood. In <hi>Acouta</hi>, or that scaly leprous eruption that is often met with, it is very effectual, the part being first moistened with mustard oil, and the powder of the seed sprinkled over its surface.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Tried in Lepra without effect, both in substance and in infusion, in 1818.&mdash;Translator.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p103><ab type=parNum>103</ab> <hi rend=sc>Paperie</hi> <UR>pApry</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Shumshad</hi>, cool, and brightens the complexion, and is useful in mucous and bilious complaints.

<p id=p104><ab type=parNum>104</ab> <hi rend=sc>Babur</hi> <UR>bAbr</UR>.&mdash;Called by some <hi>Nagbo</hi>, and also <hi>Badrouje</hi>.

<p id=p105><ab type=parNum>105</ab> <hi rend=sc>Barasinga</hi> <UR>bArAsyngA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Cervus Elaphus.</hi> Called so from its many branched horns; it is about the size of a small cow, and is also called Thunkur or Eal. Its meat is sweet to the taste, and heavy; it increases Aphrodisia, cures wind, bile, and mucus. The horns rubbed down in water, and applied externally, cure rheumatic and other pains.

<p id=p106><ab type=parNum>106</ab> <hi rend=sc>Parba</hi> <UR>pArhA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Cervus Porcinus.</hi> Very common in the upper parts of India; its properties I have never seen noticed in any Indian publication. I have met with a description of another kind of deer, Cheetul, and in my opinion they are nearly alike in their properties; the flesh of both easy of digestion, quickly increasing the volume of blood and bulk of the solids; it is without fibres, hot and somewhat dry.

<p id=p107><ab type=parNum>107</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bander</hi> <UR>bAndr</UR>.&mdash;Monkey. The flesh is beneficial in flatulencies, difficulty of breathing, and Jaundice, and is vermifuge; in P. <hi>Bozeena</hi>.

<p id=p108><ab type=parNum>108</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baag</hi> <UR>bAg-h"t</UR>.&mdash;In P. <hi>Sher</hi>. The Tiger. Its flesh is hot, and cures affections from wind, and complaints of the eyes. Its milk, mixed with Soorma, is an excellent application in that disease of the eye called <hi>Mootiabin</hi>. My grandfather experienced its good effects in his own case in the cure of this disease.

<p id=p109><ab type=parNum>109</ab> <hi rend=sc>Palug</hi> <UR>pAlg</UR>.&mdash;A much esteemed kind of culinary vegetable (<hi>Spinnach</hi>.) A. <hi>Isphanach</hi>: cool and heavy, laxative, producing wind <pb id=pb25 n=25>and mucus, as also swelling of the abdomen. It is beneficial in difficulty of breathing, and eruptions from bile. Some say that it produces intoxication in a small degree, but this I have not found to be the case.

<p id=p110><ab type=parNum>110</ab> <hi rend=sc>Paan</hi> <UR>pAn</UR>.&mdash;Aromatic, bitter, astringent, hot, and aperient. (&ldquo;<hi>Piper Betel</hi>, Lin. Warm juice, febrifuge; given in indigestion in children, and combined with musk in Hysteria.&rdquo;) It creates appetite and agreeable sensations; it also increases semen, and is aphrodisiac. It cures disorders of wind, mucus, and of the blood; corrects vitiated breath, preserves the gums, clears the blood, is useful in prostration of strength from fatigue, and cures nervous head-aches. Its juice is beneficial in giving tone to the stomach and heart, and it promotes digestion. It corrects a cold temperament, cures cholicky disorders, and pains of the bowels, and this I have repeatedly found by experience. In my own opinion, and in the opinion of every Yunani writer whom I have consulted, (with the exception of <hi>Shaik Boo Alli</hi>,) it is hot; but the physicians of Hindoostan very generally agree with the <hi>Shaik</hi>. Those of a hot temperament, who use much of this plant, are subject to eruptions of the mouth, and fissures in the tongue. Its correctors are almonds and the kernel of the cocoa-nut, but the former is to be preferred, and the addition of the almond increases its effects on the mental powers.

<p>The distilled water of <hi>Paan</hi>, as described below, is recommended for correcting a melancholic temperament, strengthening the stomach and circulation, removing spasms in the stomach, creating appetite, correcting flatulence, and loosening phlegm.

<p>Take flowers of <hi>Bugloss</hi> 5 scruples, rose leaves 6 drachms, cloves 13 scruples, <hi>Paan</hi> 4 ounces, distilled water of Bugloss two pounds, rose water 6 pounds: distil, and give as a dose from one to four drachms. Another: take of cinnamon 13 scruples, Indian Spikenard and <hi>Galangal</hi>, each 14&frac12; scruples; <hi>Bugloss</hi>, <hi>Soad Kufah</hi>, and dried mint, each 19 scruples; rose leaves and cloves each 24 scruples; anise seed (<hi>Nancha</hi>), and another kind called <hi>Rajiana</hi>, and sweet-scented flag of Toorkistan, each 19 scruples; <hi>Paan</hi> 50 leaves or more, good rose water 15 pounds: distil. The dose to be regulated by the temperament of the patient.

<pb id=pb26 n=26><p>Another: take of Indian leaf (<hi>Tezpat</hi>), 1/2 a pound; cloves, <hi>Indian Spikenard</hi>, and anise seed (<hi>Nancha</hi>), each 4 ounces, good <hi>Paan</hi> 200 leaves; bruise all the ingredients, and let them remain in infusion for 24 hours in 20 pounds of water, then draw off by distillation 14 pounds: the dose will be from 8 to 10 scruples given after meals.

<p>Another: take of cloves, <hi>Oodghoorkee</hi>, each 13 scruples; reduce both to a coarse powder; flowers of <hi>Bugloss</hi>, raspings of white <hi>Sandal</hi> wood, each 5&frac12; scruples; <hi>Bugloss</hi>, rose leaves and Indian leaf, each 4 ounces; white <hi>Paan</hi> 100 leaves, rose water 8 pounds, distilled anise seed water 4 pounds; infuse 24 hours in the heated liquids, and draw off by distillation 8 pounds.

<p id=p111><ab type=parNum>111</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pariss Peepul</hi> <UR>pArs pypl</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Palass Peepul</hi>, (Hibiscus populneoides, Roxb.)

<p rend="class(transcribernote)"><hi rend=sc>Warning:</hi> using mercury as described below is very dangerous. Mercury is highly poisonous and the claims made are incorrect.

<p id=p112><ab type=parNum>112</ab> <hi rend=sc>Para</hi> <UR>pArA</UR>, or <UR>pArd</UR> <hi>Parud</hi>, (as it is called in Sanscrit,) Mercury. It is hot, gives strength to the eyesight, is useful in Juzam, and is vermifuge. A. <hi>Zeebuck</hi>. P. <hi>Seemab</hi>. It is very generally used throughout India, in many ways, both in its native and prepared state; but in the latter we ought to be very cautious, for it is seldom sufficiently killed, or removed from its native state, in which it is a dangerous drug. One grain or two grains, or even a little more, is taken for a dose, and in some cases with success. Cups are also made of it, from which milk is drank; they possess this virtue, that a greater quantity of milk may be taken in this way than in any other. It is said, that if a little Mercury be tied up in a cloth, and boiled in milk, that the milk will have an aphrodisiac property. Should any one have taken live Mercury, and the result be, that he is attacked with Juzam, or other leprous affection, let him take the whole of an Indigo plant, and cutting it in small pieces, let it be boiled in a large quantity of water; then straining it, drink a cupful of the water very frequently, till all is taken, and till then eat no food. All the Mercury will in the course of the day be evacuated per urethra, and if the whole does not make its escape the first day, the treatment must be repeated. If the urine be received into a brass vessel, or any other with a polished surface, the Mercury will be detected; many people having been in this predicament, have followed this advice, and found the result to be as I have stated it.

<pb id=pb27 n=27><p>In a state of calcination, if it is mixed with strong vinegar, or lime juice, and afterwards dried, if no live Mercury appears it is good; otherwise it is dangerous. Others have said, that if mixed and rubbed with the juice of the radish leaf, till they are incorporated, and then a little lime juice poured over it, and again rubbed and dried, it will be fit for use; and the less live Mercury that is perceptible, the less dangerous it is.

<p>To make cups and balls of Mercury, triturate the Mercury well with pounded bricks, in an iron pot, moistening the mixture with water; wash the whole in water, and strain through a moderately fine cloth, till the Mercury becomes perfectly clear like a looking glass. Take equal parts of this purified quicksilver, rock salt, and sulphate of copper, and put them into an iron pot, with strong vinegar or lime juice, and let the whole be well triturated for 7 or 8 hours, when the compound will appear like butter; wash this well in water, that the salt and sulphate be carried off, and the Mercury left behind; take this Mercury and coat over the outside of an unburnt earthen vessel or cup, till it shall be well covered and appear like Mercury; place this in a dish filled with lime juice, and let it remain for a week, then take it out and place it in the sun to dry and harden; when quite hard, it may be used in this way, or it may be filled with water and kept so, till the clay becomes soft enough to be separated from the quicksilver. Milk drank from this cup will have an aphrodisiac quality, and will increase appetite. For the formation of this cup, 9 or 10 tolahs of quicksilver will be requisite, and for the balls one tolah.

<p><hi>The Balls.</hi>&mdash;When the ingredients above-mentioned have, from long trituration, acquired the consistence of butter, balls may be formed of the composition in a fine cloth, and allowed to remain for 7 days in lime juice; then take them out and throw them into a boiling decoction of the Dhatura leaves, allowing it to be well boiled. The balls are then to be taken out of the cloth and preserved for use.

<p>In the <corr sic=Maadertererrubad>Maadentezerrubad</corr> it is said, that if a small parcel of Mercury be boiled in soup, made from the Bis-Copra, it will become hard.

<pb id=pb28 n=28><p id=p113><ab type=parNum>113</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baboona</hi> <UR>bAbUn"h</UR>, or <hi>Marehtee</hi>: <hi>Anthemis</hi> Chamomile; a common flower, Akhgwan.

<p id=p114><ab type=parNum>114</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bans</hi> <UR>bAns</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Russub</hi>. P. <hi>Ney</hi>. Its leaves like those of the <hi>Joowar</hi>, when they are young; it is cool and a little astringent, beneficial in dysuria, gonorrhæa, piles, in stomach complaints, bilious disorders, and those of the blood, in cholicky pains from flatulence. Some say, that it increases the secretion of bile. A preserve is made from the young shoots which is much esteemed, and is useful in promoting appetite and giving tone to the stomach, correcting an increased secretion of bile or phlegm. The young shoots are first cut into small pieces, and steeped in salt and water; then dried, and afterwards put into the vinegar or other acid, in which it is to be preserved. The root of the bamboo in equal parts, with <hi>Judwár</hi> (Zedoary), and <hi>Suronjan</hi> (Hermodactylis), applied externally, I have found very effectual in removing pains from the joints. The oil expressed from the fresh joints of the plants, is also very beneficial in pains of the joints and other rheumatic affections. Mention is made of this oil in the Hajul Umeer and Ejale naáf, works written by me.

<p>The joints of the bamboo are very useful as a diuretic, and they also are effectual in producing abortion, and made into a decoction with Cassia fistula, are recommended for recorrecting and stopping the discharge after such an occurrence.

<p id=p115><ab type=parNum>115</ab> <hi rend=sc>Badgan Khutay</hi> <UR>bAdgAn khTI</UR>.&mdash;No account having been given of this in any of the Yunani works, it is left for me to give a description of it. It is a seed of a dark red color, the capsule resembles the stone of the tamarind, but is more thin and pointed, and a little open; it is used as an infusion with tea; it is hot, strengthens the stomach; is discutient, removes flatulence, and the tea corrects any bad effects that it may possess.

<p id=p116><ab type=parNum>116</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baremoo</hi> <UR>bArmU</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Dookoo</hi>.

<p id=p117><ab type=parNum>117</ab> <hi rend=sc>Barehie</hi> <UR>bArHI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Zedoary</hi>.

<p id=p118><ab type=parNum>118</ab> <hi rend=sc>Patirr</hi> <UR>pA'tyr</UR>.&mdash;The Wagtail, called in Yunani, <hi>Suffraghoon</hi>.

<p id=p119><ab type=parNum>119</ab> <hi rend=sc>Parjath</hi> <UR>pArjAt-h"h</UR>, or <hi>Parbhudder</hi>, (<hi>Bombax heptaphyllum</hi>.) The gum useful as an expectorant in worms, corpulency, swellings, and wind; it also increases certain secretions; the gum is called Moocherriss.

<pb id=pb29 n=29><p id=p120><ab type=parNum>120</ab> <hi rend=sc>Balchur</hi> <UR>bAl chr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Chur</hi> (Spikenard).

<p id=p121><ab type=parNum>121</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baeberung</hi> <UR>bAbrng</UR>.&mdash;A seed, black, roundish, and pointed; bitter and pungent to the taste, hot and dry, light and cardiac; beneficial in itchiness of the stomach, flatulent swellings, dropsy, affections of mucus, wind, or worms, and remedies costiveness. A. <hi>Birnuk Caboolie</hi>.

<p id=p122><ab type=parNum>122</ab> <hi rend=sc>Badjera</hi> <UR>bAdyr"h</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Holcus Spicatum.</hi> A common grain; in my opinion hot and dry; it strengthens the system and loins; is aphrodisiac, and corrects acidity in the stomach, but produces flatulence.

<p id=p123><ab type=parNum>123</ab> <hi rend=sc>Papeyha</hi> <UR>pApyA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Papeya</hi>, <hi>Carica Papeya</hi>, W. A native of South America, now common all over India; milky juice of the unripe fruit, vermifuge; dose,&mdash;two table spoonfuls in warm milk, afterwards a dose of castor-oil.

<p id=p124><ab type=parNum>124</ab> <hi rend=sc>Papieha</hi> <UR>pApyxA</UR>.&mdash;A common green bird; the poets of Hindoostan keep numbers of them, and have an idea that the noise they make at night, in the rainy season, produces inspiration. Its flesh is useful in affection from wind and mucus, and is alone sufficient to remove disorders from bile.

<p id=p125><ab type=parNum>125</ab> <hi rend=sc>Papeitha</hi> <UR>pApy't-hA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Papita nux</hi>, <hi>Nux Vomica Serapionis</hi>, <hi>Faba Indica</hi>, or <hi>Faba Sancti Ignatii</hi>, St. Ignatius&apos;s Bean, <hi>Catalougay</hi>, belongs to a genus called Ignatia Amara. The above description applies especially to the <hi>Papeitha</hi>, but not to the Nux Vomica, (<hi>Cuchila</hi>,) which is a Strychnos, this is not.&rdquo;

<p>This is a medicine of foreigners, and it is said, that it has been in use for the last century; there is no account of it in any books of Hindoostan, or in the Yunani works; but in this part of the country it is in general use. I have partly taken the present description from the books of foreigners, and partly it is the result of my own experience. In foreign language, it is called Papita. It is a nut, round, more or less so, each weighing about a pice; it is depressed in the centre, and of a brown color, some darker than others. Its properties are said to be various. If one of the nuts be strung on a thread and retained about the person, it is a security against sorcery, and the attempted mischief will recoil on the sorcerer. Should any one be poisoned and this be administered, the poison will thereby be rendered innocent.

<pb id=pb30 n=30><p>Whoever shall keep this constantly about his person, nor noxious wind nor evil eye will affect him.

<p>If one retti or two retti weight of this be rubbed down in water and taken, it will cure pains in the stomach and cholicks.

<p>It is very beneficial in the disorder called Elaous, also in paralytic affections.

<p>In faintings and convulsions, if the teeth are forced open, and a little given internally, also the part of the forehead called <hi>peshanie</hi> scarified, and rubbed with a little of the medicine, the senses will be restored.

<p>In bites of snakes or the sting of any noxious reptile or insect, it is highly beneficial.

<p>The powder of the seed is styptic, and when applied over a wound in sufficient quantity to form a cake and bound up, it will stop any discharge of blood.

<p>In intermittent fever, if about 4 barley-corns in bulk be given before the cold fit, it will render it much less severe, or remove it altogether.

<p>In labor, if the pains are not sufficiently effectual, 4 barley-corns of this given, will expedite delivery; but if by mistake it be given after delivery, it will cause a protrusion of the bowels.

<p>In all laxities of the bowels it is useful. If a seed be allowed to remain in the mouth, it will promote the discharge of mucus which may oppress the chest, and will relieve acidity in the stomach.

<p>If the nut be cut into slices and fried in sweet oil, the oil will form an excellent application to chancres, venereal or other cuticular eruptions.

<p>Should any one have swallowed poison and become senseless, this oil forced into the throat, if swallowed, will save the patient.

<p>This oil will also have the effect of restoring sensation to parts deprived of it, if rubbed externally.

<p>In suppression of the menses, 7 or 8 barley-corns in bulk administered, will give relief.

<p>Should a tendon be cut through from a wound, filling the division with the powder, will promote adhesion.

<pb id=pb31 n=31><p>A tincture of it in spirits, in the strength of 25 nuts to half a pound of spirit, allowed to remain 15 days in the sun, is aphrodisiac, in the quantity of 16 liquid grains every night.

<p>I have found this medicine given to the quantity of half a drachm, more or less, mixed up into a bolus with rose-water, very beneficial in excessive vomiting.

<p>Once my father and I were proceeding on a journey, it happened, that some of our people had ate in the morning, of the food prepared the night before, which being stale, produced incessant and violent vomiting; their sufferings were great, and the color of their bodies completely changed. My father having no other medicine with him, except this, gave it to them mixed with rose-water, in various proportions, with great success.

<p>In unremitting vomiting, it ought to be given twice, when it will assuredly be successful.

<p id=p126><ab type=parNum>126</ab> <hi rend=sc>Babool</hi> <UR>b-bUl</UR>, vide <hi>Keekur</hi>. Acacia Arabica, W.

<p id=p127><ab type=parNum>127</ab> <hi rend=sc>Papotun</hi> <UR>pyU'tn</UR>.&mdash;A plant, about a yard high; its seed is like that of the nightshade, at first green, and when ripe, red; in appearance like the <hi>Goonchee</hi>, covered with a very thin capsule. The leaves heated and applied to swellings are discutient, and the root pounded and mixed with water, applied to the carbuncle or introduced on a seton, will effect a cure in a few days.

<p id=p128><ab type=parNum>128</ab> <hi rend=sc>Paethaon</hi> <UR>py't-h'un</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Culsi</hi> or <hi>Breshtpirnie</hi>. A medicine of India; sweet, hot, light, and aphrodisiac; remedies laxities of the bowels and abrasions of the intestines. It decreases general heat, allays thirst, and is useful in affections of wind, mucus, bile, nausea, and fever. In the <hi>Dhinteri</hi>, it is said to be pungent, and beneficial in asthma, phlegm, and dropsy.

<p id=p129><ab type=parNum>129</ab> <hi rend=sc>Patole</hi> <UR>p'tUl</UR>, vide <hi>Pulwul</hi>.

<p id=p130><ab type=parNum>130</ab> <hi rend=sc>Patera</hi> <UR>ptyrA</UR>, usually called <hi>Patèla</hi>, a name of <hi>Birdee</hi>, a reed, growing in marshy places, used for making mats. It grows about a man&apos;s height, sometimes higher, and about the thickness of one&apos;s finger. Its ashes are peculiarly drying, and in quality dry and moist; if sprinkled over a sore, they quickly dry it up; if mixed with vinegar, dried, pounded, and applied to a <pb id=pb32 n=32>carbuncle, it will cure it. They are also useful in <hi>Ukula</hi> and <hi>Nufsoodum</hi>.

<p id=p131><ab type=parNum>131</ab> <hi rend=sc>Patung</hi> <UR>ptng</UR>.&mdash;A large tree, a native of the hills; its leaves are like that of the almond, and its flowers yellow. The fruit round, and of a dirty green color when young, becoming red as it ripens, and sweet to the taste.

<p>Physicians of Yunan have described it as hot, useful in bilious affections, mucus, and blood; also in boils and eruptions. A. <hi>Bukkum</hi>. The wood is used by dyers. In the Topha it is written, that in the quantity of 15 masha it is a deadly poison. Its powder is excellent as an application to wounds and ulcers. A bath formed of a decoction of the wood, clears the surface of the body, and gives strength to the bones.

<p id=p132><ab type=parNum>132</ab> <hi rend=sc>Putrudj</hi> <UR>ptrj</UR>.&mdash;A very common leaf, in length from three to five inches, and in breadth two inches; of a green color, and pleasant smell; it is strongly marked by veins, and is brought from the hills. It is hot and light, useful in wind and piles, nausea, pain at the stomach, flatulence, and is cardiac. A. <hi>Sadielj Hindui</hi>. Laurus Cassia, W. <hi>Tamalapatra</hi>, S. <hi>Tezpat</hi>, H. <hi>Tez</hi> (the bark), H. <hi>Twacha</hi>, S.

<p id=p133><ab type=parNum>133</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pithpapra</hi> <UR>p't-h"h pAp'rA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Oldenlandia biflora.</hi> Bitter, cool, light, and in its effects astringent; beneficial in affections and disorders of bile, mucus, and blood; also in general heat; useful in giddiness, thirst, and fever; it generates flatulence. A. <hi>Shaterra</hi>.

<p id=p134><ab type=parNum>134</ab> <hi rend=sc>Batassa</hi> <UR>btAsA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Phaneer</hi>.

<p id=p135><ab type=parNum>135</ab> <hi rend=sc>Buthua</hi> <UR>btxUA</UR>, or <hi>Pasthuk</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Chenopodium album</hi>.&rdquo; A plant about a yard high, or even less; its leaves are small like the mint, soft and serrated; when the plant is old, it becomes a little larger, but the leaves remain the same. It is used in India as a culinary vegetable, and ate with or without meat; the leaves are sweetish when young; it delights to grow near water, and is found both in the wild and cultivated state, but the wild is considered the best; it is light and laxative, strengthens the system, is useful in affections of the spleen, eruptions from diffusion of bile, piles, worms, ascarides in the rectum, and corrects all natural secretions except blood. A. <hi>Kutf</hi><corr sic=",">.</corr>

<pb id=pb33 n=33><p id=p136><ab type=parNum>136</ab> <hi rend=sc>Butela</hi> <UR>b'tylA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of Pea: see <hi>Muttur</hi>.

<p id=p137><ab type=parNum>137</ab> <hi rend=sc>Butaer</hi> <UR>b'tyr</UR>.&mdash;The Quail, <hi>Perdix Olivacea</hi>, (Buch.) Its flesh is cool, and promotes appetite; is beneficial in fever, and corrects the three principal secretions. Some have said, that this is a name for Tihoo; it resembles the partridge, but is only about half the size. In my opinion, it is cool and hot in equal degrees; it forms a desirable food for the sick, or emaciated; it strengthens the stomach, and produces costiveness.

<p id=p138><ab type=parNum>138</ab> <hi rend=sc>Batees</hi> <UR>btys</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Atees</hi>, already described.

<p id=p139><ab type=parNum>139</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pytha</hi> <UR>pyt-hA</UR>.&mdash;The gall-bladder of any animal. Bile is hot and dry, but no general account can be given of its properties, as almost that of every animal differs from another. If goat&apos;s bile be used, it will relieve an affection of the liver, and if it be mixed with camphor and butter, and introduced into the ear, it will cure tooth-ache, or rubbed into the abdomen of a child below the navel, it will prove laxative. Cow&apos;s bile, if introduced into the ear, will cure pain arising from wind, mucus or bile.

<p id=p140><ab type=parNum>140</ab> <hi rend=sc>Putalphoorie</hi> <UR>ptAl p-hU'rI</UR>.&mdash;The name of a grass, which grows in rocky places, from which it has either derived its name or from its property of dissolving the stone in the urinary or gall-bladder. It is a very small plant; its leaves, like those of the <hi>Lobeia</hi> (a small bean), when chewed are found to be very mucilaginous. It is a powerful medicine in dysuria, and is beneficial in dissolving stones in the urinary or gall-bladder. Of this I have several times had proof within my own observation; and I have given it to the extent of 5 or 6 mashas in these disorders, combined with sugar, or with other diuretic medicines, or sherbets, or even in plain water; a substitute for this may sometimes be found in Gokroo, in cucumber seeds, or some such cooling medicine. A distilled water from it is in use. In one case where I used the Putalphoorie, I found, that while fresh and green, it was not so beneficial, and induced costiveness; but when dried and given, it was much more effectual and less prejudicial.

<p id=p141><ab type=parNum>141</ab> <hi rend=sc>Puturjenie</hi> <UR>ptr jnI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Lichmuna</hi> and <hi>Lichmunie</hi>.

<p id=p142><ab type=parNum>142</ab> <hi rend=sc>Butchudder</hi> <UR>bch-hdr</UR>.&mdash;A species of the <hi>Catechu tree</hi>; hot and astringent, beneficial in Aphtha, tooth-ache, blood, itch, poisons, and phlegm.

<pb id=pb34 n=34><p id=p143><ab type=parNum>143</ab> <hi rend=sc>Budjaesaar</hi> <UR>bjAysAr</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree; the best sort is called Bidjaesaar; it is beneficial in Juzam, ptyalism, white leprosy, seminal weakness, ascarides in the rectum, disorders of bile and blood, cleansing the fluids, strengthening the roots of the hair, and it is well known as an ingredient in many formulæ.

<p id=p144><ab type=parNum>144</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bitchoo</hi> <UR>bch-hU</UR>, (Scorpion.).&mdash;A. <hi>Akrub</hi>. Its medicinal properties are described in Yunani works. <hi>Bitchoo Diriag</hi> is small and of a blackish color, tinged with red, and has a sting on its <hi>head</hi> with which it wounds; its eyes are pointed, and its head is large in proportion to its body. The author of the <hi>Dara Shekoi</hi> supposes this to be the <hi>Singee</hi> fish.

<p id=p145><ab type=parNum>145</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bejoura</hi> <UR>bj-hUrA</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Utrudj</hi>, though some describe them as distinct species.

<p id=p146><ab type=parNum>146</ab> <hi rend=sc>Butch</hi> <UR>bch</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Acorus Calamus</hi>, W. <hi>Vacha</hi>, S. Sweet-scented flag, <hi>Acorus Odorant</hi>, F. <hi>Kalamus Nurtzil</hi>, G. <hi>Calamo Aromatica</hi>, J. <hi>Acoro Calamo</hi>, S. <hi>Wedj</hi>. A. <hi>Agrtoorki</hi>. P. One kind of this is white; both kinds are bitter, pungent, hot and stomachic: loosens mucus from the throat, cures itch, mucous disorders, epilepsy, idiotism, the influence of evil spirits. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi> it is written, that the Indians have a belief, that if the <hi>butch</hi> be taken, cut in small pieces, and put into an earthen pot, with ghee sufficient to cover it about an inch, that is one part of the butch and two of ghee, and this pot placed in Jow for 40 days, and 15 mashas of this taken daily, it will cure paralysis and loss of memory, and all complaints arising from cold.

<p id=p147><ab type=parNum>147</ab> <hi rend=sc>Budgerkund</hi> <UR>bjr kn'd</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Soorun</hi>, q. vide.

<p id=p148><ab type=parNum>148</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beechnak</hi> <UR>bys nAk</UR>.&mdash;The name of a poison; vide <hi>Singia</hi>.

<p id=p149><ab type=parNum>149</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bedareekund</hi> <UR>bdArI kn'd</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Baraikund</hi>. Of this two kinds are described; one of which is white, and called <hi>Chitturkund</hi>; the properties of all are alike.

<p id=p150><ab type=parNum>150</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bedarkee</hi> <UR>bdArky</UR>.&mdash;Also a name for <hi>Bedareekund</hi>.

<p id=p151><ab type=parNum>151</ab> <hi rend=sc>Budhill</hi> <UR>bd-hyl</UR>.&mdash;Indian <hi>Suffergill</hi> (as it is called); the fruit of a large tree, very common all over India; the tree is like a middle-sized Jamin; its leaves are broad and longer than the Daak, but the latter is round, whereas this is longish, irregular on the back, and very brittle; when ripe the fruit is of a sweet <pb id=pb35 n=35>acid taste, and when unripe it is perfectly sour; when about half ripe, it is hot, heavy, and flatulent, producing wind, disorders of bile, decreasing aphrodisia and appetite, and increasing phlegm; when ripe its properties are quite the reverse; but with respect to the disorders produced by suffusion of bile, I have not ascertained if it is beneficial or otherwise. The <hi>Dara Shekoi</hi> has not noticed this medicine, and for my information I am indebted to works of Hindoostan. As far as I can judge, it increases the tone of the stomach, raises the spirits; but taken in quantities, it is difficult of digestion and produces flatulence. It is acid, and therefore remedies bile, but it increases cough. The kernel is astringent.

<p id=p152><ab type=parNum>152</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bedhara</hi> <UR>bd-hrA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, brought from the hills; it is a light wood about the thickness of liquorice root; bitter and astringent, hot and aperient. It is aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of wind, phlegm, and blood; also in swellings of the body, seminal weakness, and forms an ingredient in many approved formulæ.

<p id=p153><ab type=parNum>153</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pudmeinie</hi> <UR>pdmnI</UR>.&mdash;(The <hi>Winter Lilly</hi>.) The flower of the <hi>Kawul</hi>; sweet and cool, heavy and stomachic, astringent and useful in disorders of bile, mucus, and blood. A. <hi>Neelophir</hi>.

<p id=p154><ab type=parNum>154</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pudumcharnie</hi> <UR>pdm chArnI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of the above, with few leaves; light and beneficial in mucous disorders and suppression of urine, and it hardens the matrix. For a more particular account, see Kawul.

<p id=p155><ab type=parNum>155</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pudumrauj</hi> <UR>pdmrAj</UR>.&mdash;Sweet and astringent; cool and aperient; it strengthens the eyes, corrects corpulence, cures boils, eruptions, and is an antidote to poison. A. <hi>Yacootlal</hi>.

<p id=p156><ab type=parNum>156</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pedloon</hi> <UR>pdlUn</UR>.&mdash;A kind of salt; vide <hi>Noon</hi>. The salt of lead, called also <hi>Kutchloon</hi>.

<p id=p157><ab type=parNum>157</ab> <hi rend=sc>Burrh</hi> <UR>b'r"h</UR>.&mdash;A large tree of Hindoostan, very common, cool and heavy; astringent, useful in mucous disorders, in bile, boils, and eruptions. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi> it is called <hi>Reesha</hi> in Persian. If the milk is applied to swellings or boils, it will effect a cure by resolution; or if applied to the eye, will remove specks on the cornea. If a tooth be at all loose, the milk applied to it will cause it to fall out without pain, but care must be taken that it be not applied to the sound tooth. If the bark <pb id=pb36 n=36>of the tree be put into the pan in which fish is fried, it will soften the bones. The young shoots of the hanging roots and the bark, are cool, dry, and astringent; the milk is hot and powerful; the fruit less so. If the above-mentioned young shoots be bruised and put into a cloth, and heated over the fire, it forms an excellent and affectual application to lumbago or other rheumatic affections. The fruit, ate with milk and sugar, is mentioned as aphrodisiac, and increasing certain secretions. The young shoots of the pendent roots and leaves, and the bark are astringent, and useful in diarrh&oelig;a. The leaf-buds are also recommended for the same complaint, dressed with meat or otherwise.

<p id=p158><ab type=parNum>158</ab> <hi rend=sc>Birnaan</hi> <UR>br'nAn</UR> or <hi rend=sc>Burna</hi> <UR>brnA</UR>.&mdash;A tree of <hi>Adjmere</hi>; the wood of which is used for making beads, which from their beauty are sent to different places as presents. Its medicinal property is hot and aperient, stomachic, beneficial in disorders of the blood, phlegm, wind, dysuria, and emaciation; it is vermifuge, and lithontriptic.

<p id=p159><ab type=parNum>159</ab> <hi rend=sc>Purpeeloo</hi> <UR>prplU</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Araaq Hindu&imacr;</hi>. Cool, and useful in itch, Juzam, hemorrhoids, disorders of blood, mucus, and bile.

<p id=p160><ab type=parNum>160</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beridda</hi> <UR>brydA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of Hindoostan; cool, and grateful, increasing seminal secretion, removing cough, hectic fever, disorders of blood, and phlegm, and increasing the strength of the solids.

<p id=p161><ab type=parNum>161</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pereshtpurnie</hi> <UR>prysh't-h"h prny</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Pæthaon</hi>.

<p id=p162><ab type=parNum>162</ab> <hi rend=sc>Berchakund</hi> <UR>brchAknd</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Pindaloo</hi>; another kind is called <hi>Roomus</hi>, also <hi>Mudwull</hi>; a third kind is <hi>Sunkal</hi>; a fourth <hi>Kashtall</hi>; a fifth <hi>Hustaloo</hi>; a sixth <hi>Rucktall</hi>, called <hi>Ruckutkund</hi>. All these roots are sweet, cool, dry, and flatulent; also aperient. They give tone to the urinary bladder, remove eruptions (the consequence of suffused bile), increase semen, phlegm, and wind; they strengthen the solids, are slow of digestion, and increase the secretion of milk. <hi>Pindaloo</hi> is somewhat bitter and hot, heavy, mucilaginous, and diuretic. <hi>Mudwall</hi> increases bile, and is bitter; but it is beneficial in mucous disorders.

<p id=p163><ab type=parNum>163</ab> <hi rend=sc>Barumbie</hi> <UR>bArnbI</UR> or <hi rend=sc>Soonputtie</hi> <UR>snp'tI</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, cool, aperient, light; increases the powers of perception and memory, clears the voice, cures Juzam, jaundice, seminal weakness, foulness of the <pb id=pb37 n=37>blood, and cough; is an antidote to poisons, beneficial in swelling of the body, in bilious affections, and is a common ingredient in all useful formulæ. A. <hi>Zernub</hi>.

<p id=p164><ab type=parNum>164</ab> <hi rend=sc>Burberi</hi> <UR>brbrI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Hermodaclytes</hi>. Cool, strong, dry; increases the general heat and bile, cures disorders of the blood, phlegm, daad, and worms. It is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p165><ab type=parNum>165</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bureeja</hi> <UR>bryjA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kuna</hi>, (<hi>Galbanum</hi>.)

<p id=p166><ab type=parNum>166</ab> <hi rend=sc>Berehta</hi> <UR>byr-htA</UR> or <hi rend=sc>Berehti</hi> <UR>byr-h'tI</UR>.&mdash;(Sorrel)? (but the first is the common name.) <hi>Kuthai</hi>; some say, that both kinds of <hi>Kuthai</hi> are called <hi>Berehti</hi>; but it is not so, the small kind only goes by that name. <hi>Karenta</hi> and <hi>Kutla</hi> are both names of the large <hi>Kuthai</hi>, and <hi>Kuthlee</hi>; and <hi>Kuntkaree</hi> and <hi>Kuntkalka</hi>, are names for the small <hi>Kuthai</hi>. It is hot and astringent, <corr sic=strenghthens>strengthens</corr> the animal spirits; is stomachic, and a pleasant addition to the flavor of food. It is used in disorders of mucus and blood, wind, worms, ascarides in the rectum, Juzam, fever, asthma, pain in the bowels, cough, dysuria, emaciation, Badgola. It is lithontriptic, and in P. is called <hi>Badinjandyshtee</hi>. The flower called <hi>Gulkhar</hi>.

<p id=p167><ab type=parNum>167</ab> <hi rend=sc>Purbal</hi> <UR>prbAl</UR>.&mdash;A name for Coral; see <hi>Moonga</hi>.

<p id=p168><ab type=parNum>168</ab> <hi rend=sc>Byrumbseerjella</hi> <UR>byrm srjlA</UR>, vide Hurhurra.

<p id=p169><ab type=parNum>169</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peertuckhpirnie</hi> <UR>prtk prnI</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A species of <hi>Peereshtpirnee</hi>.

<p id=p170><ab type=parNum>170</ab> <hi rend=sc>Buryara</hi> <UR>bryArA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Indian Mallow, (Sida cordifolia, W. Sida Rhombifolia, W. Sida Rhomboid&oelig;a, Roxb. MS. Sp. Ch.) Shrubby, erect, ramous; leaves short, petioled, rhomboid-lanceolate, serrate, 3-nerved, villous; stipules sitaceous. Peduncles axillary, solitary, shorter than the leaves, one-flowered, capsules 12, without beak, Roxb. MS.&rdquo; A very light flower of Hindoostan, cool and dry, demulcent and emolient; it promotes seminal secretion, and cures disorders of the spirits, gonorrh&oelig;a, and seminal weakness. Take 24 grs. of the dried flower in powder, and eat with milk and sugar, for the cure of the above-mentioned disorders. Ext. <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>.

<p id=p171><ab type=parNum>171</ab> <hi rend=sc>Burruntaaki</hi> <UR>brntAkI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Buretta</hi>.

<p id=p172><ab type=parNum>172</ab> <hi rend=sc>Purundha</hi> <UR>prnd-hA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mahameet</hi>.

<p id=p173><ab type=parNum>173</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pursarnie</hi> <UR>prsArnI</UR>.&mdash;Hot and purgative, pungent and strengthening; expels wind, disperses phlegm, &amp;c. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, <hi>Pursarnie</hi> is said to be a medicine of India; hot and dry, <pb id=pb38 n=38>beneficial in leprosy, boils and pains in the joints, mucous disorders, and flatulence.

<p id=p174><ab type=parNum>174</ab> <hi rend=sc>Berahumnie</hi> <UR>brhxmnI</UR>, or <hi>Berrumdundie</hi> <UR>br-hm dndI</UR>.&mdash;A wild plant, growing very low, with very thin branches and dark-red flowers, having small prickles on them; it is sweet, cool and light, increases knowledge and memory, relieves pains in the back, clears the voice, and is useful in marasmus, seminal weakness, and fever. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, it is thus described&mdash;<hi>Beramdundie</hi>, a medicine of India, with prickles on its flowers; hot and dry: seven scruples in powder taken in cow&apos;s milk, increases memory; is aphrodisiac, and beneficial in mania; it also removes too great irritability in the seminal vessels.

<p id=p175><ab type=parNum>175</ab> <hi rend=sc>Berahumie</hi> <UR>brhmI</UR>.&mdash;I have given a description of this separately, as it is so done in the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>. A medicine of India, of the <corr sic="herbt ribe">herb tribe</corr>; pungent, astringent, hot and dry in the 2d degree; beneficial in cholicks, phlegm, epilepsy, depression of spirits, fever from mucus, and delirium from cold; it is also stomachic.

<p id=p176><ab type=parNum>176</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peroza</hi> <UR>pyrUzA</UR>, or <hi>Berektummun</hi>.&mdash;A common stone, called in India <hi>Feroza</hi>. It is astringent and sweet, stomachic, and an antidote to all poisons.

<p id=p177><ab type=parNum>177</ab> <hi rend=sc>Biscopra</hi> <UR>pskUprA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Trianthema Pentandra.</hi> A wild grass, of a spreading kind, about 1&frac12; or a yard long; its leaves are like those of the Bookla Yemania, but rather less; its flowers are of a red yellowish color, and the whole plant forms itself into a circle on the ground of about half a yard in diameter. It is bitter, sweet, hot and dry, also aperient. It cures boils, disorders from mucus, bile, blood, wind, swellings, and creates appetite. It forms an ingredient in many formulæ. One kind of this is red, and is called <hi>Rukit Bhitt</hi>; bitter and powerfully stomachic; cool, light, and inducing costiveness; producing wind, beneficial in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood.

<p id=p178><ab type=parNum>178</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pystha</hi> <UR>pyst-hA</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Pistachio Nut</hi>. Sweet, hot, oleaginous, heavy, aphrodisiac, and detergent; useful in disorders of wind and mucus, and difficult of digestion. A. <hi>Fystuk</hi>.

<p id=p179><ab type=parNum>179</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pysturling</hi> <UR>pystrlng</UR>.&mdash;A name of <hi>Chitchera</hi> or <hi>Chirchera</hi>, so called from its fixing itself in one&apos;s clothes.

<pb id=pb39 n=39><p id=p180><ab type=parNum>180</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bussunti</hi> <UR>bsntI</UR>.&mdash;A flower of a yellow color; cool, light, pungent, powerfully diminishing all the secretions and sensible perspiration. Of a sweet smell, and pleasant to the taste.

<p id=p181><ab type=parNum>181</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bishnookrantha</hi> <UR>bshnUkrAnt-hA</UR>.&mdash; A kind of <hi>Biscopra</hi>, of a pungent nature, strengthening the mental faculties; vermifuge; beneficial in boils, eruptions and mucous disorders. Some writers have given it under the head <hi>Kuneyr</hi>.

<p id=p182><ab type=parNum>182</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bishash</hi> <UR>bshAsh</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Oostoochoodoos</hi>.

<p id=p183><ab type=parNum>183</ab> <hi rend=sc>Boqun</hi> <UR>bkn</UR>, or <hi>Bookla</hi>, or <hi>Book</hi>.&mdash;A plant, the branches of which are very thin, the leaves small, long and pointed; the flowers small and white, growing on every knot of the plant; they are round, useful in disorders from poison, phlegm, bile, and in dysuria. It also is lithontriptic, and beneficial in general heat and delirium.

<p id=p184><ab type=parNum>184</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bukochie</hi> <UR>bkUchI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Conyza</hi>, or <hi>Serratula Anthelmintica</hi>. One kind of which is white, both sweet, astringent, and stomachic, powerfully cool and dry. They are aperient, producing flatulent, tension of the belly, promote appetite, and useful in disorders of blood and bile, difficulty of breathing, leprosy, seminal weakness, fever, and worms. The plant is carminative, and its seed increases bile, is useful in white leprosy, disorders of wind and phlegm, and forms an ingredient in many of the formula.

<p id=p185><ab type=parNum>185</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bagerie</hi> <UR>bgyrI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Alauda.</hi> A bird, the flesh of which is cool, sweet, and dry; beneficial in disorders of bile and mucus. In my opinion it is hot and aphrodisiac; also cardiac, and increases corpulency; it cleanses the blood, and is a very proper food for aged persons, those of a cold temperament, or such as labour under cold diseases.

<p id=p186><ab type=parNum>186</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bukaen</hi> <UR>bkAyn</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Melia Sempervirens.</hi> (A species of the bead-tree.) The Hindoos call it <hi>Mahaneeb</hi>, vide M. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, it is thus described: <hi>Bukaen</hi>, is a common tree, cool, dry, and bitter; useful in disorders of the blood, gravel, swellings, and miliary eruptions, also piles and lumbago. If 9 mashas of the seed be bruised, mixed with equal parts of sugar, and taken every morning in water, it will stop the discharge from the bleeding piles; or if a seer of <corr sic="th eseeds">the seeds</corr>, when they have become yellow, be infused in two seers of water, and buried in the ground for 21 <pb id=pb40 n=40>days, taken out, and &frac14; seer drank every morning for six months, it will certainly cure leprosy; both Juzam and white.

<p id=p187><ab type=parNum>187</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pushanbedh</hi> <UR>pAshAn byd"h</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Jeuntiana</hi>. Its oil is equally beneficial, as that before recommended for strengthening particular organs. This and the Jeuntian are of a very different appearance, they are either distinct plants, or have become different from peculiarity of soil or cultivation. It is a root of a dirty-red color, or when broken, of a bright red; in figure a little crooked. It is cool and laxative; it is lithontriptic, cures seminal weakness, and gonorrh&oelig;a. My late uncle used half of this, and half <hi>Mendhi</hi>, as an application to the inside of the hands and soles of the feet of women laboring under immoderate flow of the menses, and equal benefit was derived, as is usually done from the <hi>Mendhi</hi>. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, it is called cool and dry, removing flatulence, bile, thirst, heat, dysuria, gravel, contraction of the urethra, and difficult menstruation.

<p>For the cure of the above-mentioned complaints, it is to be given in water; but for seminal weakness, gonorrh&oelig;a, dysuria, &amp;c. it is to be taken in goat&apos;s milk. The dose is six mashas. It grows in stony places.

<p id=p188><ab type=parNum>188</ab> <hi rend=sc>Buckree</hi> <UR>bkrI</UR>, or <hi>Chèrie</hi>, q. vide

<p id=p189><ab type=parNum>189</ab> <hi rend=sc>Becktindeek</hi> <UR>bktndy'k</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Teindoo</hi>, q. vide

<p id=p190><ab type=parNum>190</ab> <hi rend=sc>Palass</hi> <UR>plAs</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Butea Frondosa.</hi> A very common tree, called also <hi>Pullae</hi>; it is a large forest tree, which in season loses its leaves and throws out flowers of an orange or fire color; its leaves are oval; their breadth about 3 or 4 inches; it is hot, laxative, and stomachic; used in boils, eruptions, Badqola, gravel, piles, worms, and broken bones. It is written, that when the white flowers of the Daak are found, and any one shall eat the seeds and the bark of them, their hearts will be cleansed, their understanding increased, and they shall then ever be endowed with supernatural knowledge; it may be advisable to eat <hi>moong ka dall</hi> along with it. Its flowers are called <hi>Tesoo</hi>; they are astringent, curing disorders of mucus, bile, blood, and difficulty in making water. If a decoction is prepared from the flowers, and poured warm from a height on the parts, it will be found useful in pains of the kidneys, bladder, and in suppression of urine. It is diuretic, and if <pb id=pb41 n=41>given with medicines of that class, it will add greatly to their efficacy. The flowers are excellent as a fomentation in pains; also hydrocele and schirrous swellings of the testicle may be greatly <sic corr=benefited>benefitted</sic> by it. The seeds called <hi>Palass papra</hi>, are hot and light; they cure seminal weakness, piles, worms, and disorders of wind and mucus. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Palass papra</hi> is said to be like the seed of the <hi>Amultas</hi>, round, broad, and thin, of a dark-brown color; its kernel white, or yellowish, and perfectly insipid: it is oleaginous, and smells when chewed.&rdquo; In my opinion, it is useful in phlegm, and the root is beneficial in cholic. The nurses of Hindoostan put one seed into the mixture, which they exhibit after parturition, with much benefit, as it is cardiac. The capsule when whole is also used in decoction. The dose to an adult is four or five seeds, but beyond that, the opinion of the physician is necessary. I have used the bark of the seed and the capsule made into pills, with great success, when mixed with <hi>Goor</hi>.

<p id=p191><ab type=parNum>191</ab> <hi rend=sc>Belaikund</hi> <UR>blA'yI knd</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Maadentezerrabad.</hi>&rdquo; A medicine of India, also called <hi>Pullai</hi> seed, or <hi>Kaika</hi>; a seed red, round, and about the size of a pice, but thinner: it is light as a leaf, and is hot, and dry in the third degree. Applied to blisters on the tongue, to boils, or other eruptions; it removes the bad skin, and cleanses the parts below. It is purgative; removes wind, and every complaint of mucus, cold, or itch; its corrector is ghee, or butter, and its succedaneum <hi>Koonush</hi>. The dose is three and a half masha, or 12 grains.

<p id=p192><ab type=parNum>192</ab> <hi rend=sc>Palass Peepul</hi> <UR>plAs pypl</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Hibiscus Populneoides</hi>, (Roxb.) A large tree, of the <hi>Peepul</hi> kind; its leaves and fruit large, moist and aphrodisiac; producing phlegm and worms.

<p id=p193><ab type=parNum>193</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pulwull</hi> <UR>pl Ul</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Trichosanthes Di&oelig;ca</hi>, (Roxb.) A culinary vegetable, of the cucumber kind, oval in its shape; the plant low, and creeping, like the <hi>Kanoorie</hi> or <hi>Cutcherie</hi>; they sometimes sow it with the <hi>Paan</hi>. It is eaten either (when boiled) by itself, or dressed with meat; it is hot and moist; promotes digestion; and strengthens the stomach and powers of virility; creates appetite; cures cough and disorders of the blood, and lessens the other three secretions. It is also beneficial in fevers, boils, and eruptions. <pb id=pb42 n=42>It is vermifuge; its leaves are cooling, and cure disorders. Its branches remove superabundance of phlegm, and its root is pungent and aperient, strengthening the stomach. Equal in its degree. Again, it is said to be a fruit eaten by the people of India, sown and cultivated with the <hi>Paan</hi>, because it delights in shady places. Useful in fever, piles, and mental debility; it is aperient and promotes digestion; and some say, an antidote to poison.

<p id=p194><ab type=parNum>194</ab> <hi rend=sc>Billie</hi> <UR>blI</UR>.&mdash;The Cat; its meat is sweet, hot, and moist: of use in mucous and flatulent disorders.

<p id=p195><ab type=parNum>195</ab> <hi rend=sc>Billoousseeke</hi> <corr sic="<URA>blUskI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>blUsyk</UR></corr>.&mdash;Astringent; removes disorders of wind, phlegm, cholick, or other pain of the bowels. The <hi>Bale</hi> which bears no fruit, is called by this name.

<p id=p196><ab type=parNum>196</ab> <hi rend=sc>Byll</hi> <UR>byl</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Crat&oelig;va</hi>, or <hi>Ægle Marmelos</hi>. The fruit of jungle-tree, like the Quince; called also <hi>Bale</hi>.

<p id=p197><ab type=parNum>197</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bylla</hi> <UR>bylA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Shahudae</hi>, <hi>Keekwon</hi>, <hi>Kangi</hi>, and <hi>Bursali</hi>.

<p id=p198><ab type=parNum>198</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bulka</hi> <UR>blkA</UR>.&mdash;Likewise a name for <hi>Kangi</hi>.

<p id=p199><ab type=parNum>199</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bunda</hi> <UR>bndA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Epidendrum Tessillatum</hi>, (Missletoe.) <hi>Epidendron Tesseloides</hi>, (Roxb.) I know not whether this is in itself a tree, or a shrub, or from whence it makes its appearance; but it is found growing from the branches of other trees. It is dry, and beneficial in disorders of mucus, wind, and blood; in boils and eruptions, and as an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p200><ab type=parNum>200</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pynvar</hi> <UR>pyny Ur</UR> or <hi>T&oelig;roota</hi>.&mdash;A species of <hi>Cassia Obtusifolia</hi>. A wild shrub of India, about one or one and a half yard high, its seed is used for food, and is reckoned among the farinæ; it grows like the <hi>Mooth</hi>, especially when it is split down the middle. The color of the capsule is brownish, long, and has an indented mark on both sides. It is sweet, cool, dry, light, and useful in disorders of wind, bile, Juzam, Daad, and worms. It also produces an exhilaration of the spirits. I have found that three masha bruised, and mixed with a pound of curdled milk, placed in an earthen vessel for three days, till it becomes fermented, is very useful when externally applied in psora and other kinds of itch. The seed is heating, and generally mentioned as such. It is also light, and beneficial in itch, Daad, Zaerbad, Soorkhbad, <pb id=pb43 n=43>and produces phlegm. Its leaves and young stalks are light; and produce flatulence and mucus. It is called by many <hi>Chukwund</hi>.

<p id=p201><ab type=parNum>201</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ponauk</hi> <UR>pnA'k</UR>.&mdash;An Indian flower, sweet and cool; useful in disorders of the blood, bile, and mucus.

<p id=p202><ab type=parNum>202</ab> <hi rend=sc>Punk</hi> <UR>pnk</UR>.&mdash;In Arabic <hi>Vaheel</hi>. P. <hi>Lae</hi>, (wet clay). Cool and laxative; useful in general heat in hemorrhoids, and in swellings of the body.

<p id=p203><ab type=parNum>203</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bunbele</hi> <corr sic="<URA>bn bylI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>bn byl</UR></corr>.&mdash;The flower of the wild Raibele. It is astringent, lithontriptic, and recommended in mucous and windy disorders, and in suppression of urine.

<p id=p204><ab type=parNum>204</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pindole</hi> <UR>pndUl</UR>.&mdash;A white earth, used for cleaning houses; sweet, cool, moist, astringent, and beneficial in that species of leprosy, called Soorkhbad; also in bilious disorders, and affections of the uterus. It is also said to clear the complexion.

<p id=p205><ab type=parNum>205</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pendaloo</hi> <UR>pndAlU</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Trewia Nudiflora</hi>, (Lin.) <hi>Rottlera Indica</hi>, (Wild.) This is of two kinds; a white, and a red. The latter is probably that called <hi>Roomis</hi>, vide R.; the white is always called <hi>Pendaloo</hi>. It is sweet, cool; difficult of digestion; aphrodisiac; useful in lessening bilious secretion, in dysuria and heat, and in heightening the animal spirits.

<p id=p206><ab type=parNum>206</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pindaluck</hi> <UR>pndAlk</UR>, or <hi>Pindal</hi>, vide <hi>Pendaloo</hi>.

<p id=p207><ab type=parNum>207</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bunpowarie</hi> <UR>bnpUArI</UR>.&mdash;The flower of the wild <hi>Powarie</hi>, which blows in the hot weather; there is one kind of this, which flowers in the rains; both are bitter, cool, light; lessens the three principal secretions, and is useful in affections of the ear, nose, and mouth.

<p id=p208><ab type=parNum>208</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pindkhajoor</hi> <UR>pn'dk-hjUr</UR>, vide <hi>Bhoomkhajoor</hi>.

<p id=p209><ab type=parNum>209</ab> <hi rend=sc>Punna</hi> <UR>pnA</UR>.&mdash;A name for the stone, called <hi>Zamoorud</hi>.

<p id=p210><ab type=parNum>210</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bunslochun</hi> <UR>bnslUchn</UR>.&mdash;A substance produced in the hollow joints of the bamboo; cool and allaying thirst; removing hectic fever, common fever, difficulty of breathing, bilious disorders, foulness of blood, and jaundice. It is called in Arabic <hi>Tubasheer</hi>.

<p id=p211><ab type=parNum>211</ab> <hi rend=sc>Poondereek</hi> <UR>pndry'k</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kawul</hi>.

<p id=p212><ab type=parNum>212</ab> <hi rend=sc>Benowla</hi> <corr sic="<URA>pUAlA</URA>" resp=errata><UR>bnUlA</UR></corr>.&mdash;The Cotton-seed. Moist, and heavy; causes bile, increases seminal secretion and milk, both in the human and brute creation.

<p id=p213><ab type=parNum>213</ab> <hi rend=sc>Punchcheer</hi> <corr sic="<URA>pnch chynI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>pnj chyz</UR></corr>.&mdash;Name of a compound made of the milk of five trees; viz. <hi>Burr</hi>, <hi>Peepul</hi>, <hi>Palass peepul</hi>, <hi>Goolur</hi>, <hi>Pakur</hi>; <pb id=pb44 n=44>some, in place of <hi>Palass peepul</hi> substitute the <hi>Seriss</hi>. It is astringent, useful in boils, eruptions, swellings, and sudden inflammatory eruptions; (Eczema Rubrum;) also affections of the vagina. It increases seminal secretion and milk, and promotes the union of fractured limbs. The leaves of the above-mentioned trees are cool, light, and astringent; very beneficial in disorders of mucus, wind, and the blood; their fruit produces swellings of the belly, but is useful in eruptions caused by superabundance of bile and disorders of mucus.

<p id=p214><ab type=parNum>214</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pungekool</hi> <UR>pnj kUl pnch kUl</UR>.&mdash;A formula of four ingredients; viz. <hi>Peepul</hi>, <hi>Peepulajab</hi>, <hi>Chittea</hi>, and <hi>dried Ginger</hi>. It creates appetite, and is recommended in disorders of wind, mucus, swellings of the belly, produced by affections of the urinary bladder, and bad-gola.

<p id=p215><ab type=parNum>215</ab> <hi rend=sc>Punjemool</hi> <UR>pnch mUl</UR>.&mdash;Two kinds, called large and small, by way of distinction. The large is composed of <hi>Bale</hi>, <hi>Aginmunth</hi>, <hi>Padill</hi>, <hi>Káshmerie Sheonak</hi>. Its taste is bitter and astringent; it is light, hot, and stomachic; dissolves animal fat, cures disorders of phlegm, wind, and difficulty of breathing. The small is composed of <hi>Gookhroo</hi>, <hi>Salpurbi</hi>, <hi>Bureshtpurbi</hi>, <hi>Bereta</hi>, <hi>Rutai</hi>. Its taste is sweet, and its properties are in equilibrium. It strengthens the system in general, and is useful in disorders of bile and wind.

<p id=p216><ab type=parNum>216</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bindaal</hi> <UR>bndAl</UR>.&mdash;A creeping plant, which is found on trees; it resembles the <hi>Kusseroo</hi>, and its seed is dark-colored, like those of the Till. Its capsule is somewhat larger than that of the <hi>Kusseroo</hi>, covered with a black rind, which also covers a second. It is very beneficial in the <hi>Zaerbad</hi> of horses; is pungent, and creates appetite, and is useful in wind and mucus. It is common to hills, plains, and ditches. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi> it is said to be a cure for hydrophobia, in the quantity of two fruits mixed with black pepper. It is said to be an Indian fruit like the black Hurrhe, light, bitter and elastic: its rind is hard; and the best kind of it is yellow. It is hot and dry in the 3rd degree. If pounded and sifted, and after a motion introduced into the rectum, it will in a few days cause the separation of hemorrhoids and their discharge. A fumigation of these seeds is also very beneficial <pb id=pb45 n=45>in external piles. If they are bruised and mixed with cow&apos;s <hi>ghee</hi>, and introduced into the nose, they will cure irritability of temper and epilepsy, and remove all complaints arising from wind. If two or three seeds be moistened with water for a night, and in the morning two or three drops be introduced into the nose, it will produce the discharge of that yellow fluid from the brain which causes the disease named <hi>Pirbaal</hi>, or loss of sensation in the olfactory nerves.

<p id=p217><ab type=parNum>217</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bindeakurkotheki</hi> <UR>bndyAkrk'tkI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Banjekakora</hi>, so called from its barrenness; pungent, useful in poisons and cough.

<p id=p218><ab type=parNum>218</ab> <hi rend=sc>Puns</hi> <UR>pns</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kutel</hi>.

<p id=p219><ab type=parNum>219</ab> <hi rend=sc>Punnus</hi> <corr sic="<URA>pns</URA>" resp=errata><UR>pnys</UR></corr>.&mdash;An appellation for <hi>Lackutch</hi>.

<p id=p220><ab type=parNum>220</ab> <hi rend=sc>Punealae</hi> <UR>pnyAlAI</UR>.&mdash;A plant, &ldquo;<hi>Flacourtia Catafracta</hi>;&rdquo; the fruit of which resembles the <hi>Zerdaloo</hi>, and is itself like to the <hi>Neemb</hi> tree; the leaves are like those of the ratan; unripe, it is green, but when ripe red.

<p id=p221><ab type=parNum>221</ab> <hi rend=sc>Poiey</hi> <UR>pU'yI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Basella Alba et Rubra.</hi>&rdquo; A culinary vegetable which grows slow and creeping; its fruit is black; cool and moist; it is heavy and rough in the throat, thickens the voice, is soporific; promotes the secretion of semen and mucus, and cures eruptions from bilious disorder.

<p id=p222><ab type=parNum>222</ab> <hi rend=sc>Podhka</hi> <UR>pUdk-hA</UR> or <hi>Boleserie</hi>.&mdash;A large tree with very beautiful flowers, of a sweet smell. It bears fruit like, or rather having the color of the orange, in size and shape like the <hi>Baer</hi>, or <hi>Bulooth</hi>; it is cool, beneficial in disorders of phlegm, bile, and affections of the teeth, as has been ascertained by experience. The fruit is cool and astringent, flatulent, and diminishes phlegm and bile. If chewed and kept in the mouth, it cures tooth-ache.

<p id=p223><ab type=parNum>223</ab> <hi rend=sc>Boont</hi> <UR>bUn't</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cicer Arietenum.</hi>&rdquo; The green, unripe Gram. It is in the opinion of Indian physicians cool and dry; allays chordee; increases wind; is light, flatulent, and also favors secretion of bile and blood. The Yunani physicians differ very materially from those of Hindoostan respecting its properties.

<p id=p224><ab type=parNum>224</ab> <hi rend=sc>Potie</hi> <UR>pU'tI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cyprinus Chyssopareius</hi>,&rdquo; (Buch.) A very small fish; heavy, and increasing phlegm; it is the smallest of all <pb id=pb46 n=46>fish; sweet to the taste, beneficial in all the three secretions, All the varieties of small fish are strengthening and aphrodisiac; stomachic, and useful in affections of wind and cough.

<p id=p225><ab type=parNum>225</ab> <hi rend=sc>Potuck</hi> <UR>ptg</UR>.&mdash;A kind of honey, resembling <hi>ghee</hi>; hot, dry, and light.

<p id=p226><ab type=parNum>226</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ponda</hi> <UR>pUndA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Saccharum Officinarum</hi>, (Sugar-cane). Sweet, cool, moist, heavy, and aphrodisiac; strengthening the system; enlivening the flow of animal spirits; beneficial in bilious disorders, and is diuretic. It increases the secretion of mucus, and breeds worms in the intestines.

<p>That which is of a red color, is cool and heavy, and allays general heat; useful in disorders of bile and blood: remedies suppression of urine. The black Sugar-cane is in its properties like that which is white. The very best is cool and moist, aphrodisiac, laxative, and increases mucus.

<p id=p227><ab type=parNum>227</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bole</hi> <UR>bUl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi rend=sc>Myrrha.</hi>&rdquo; A name for <hi rend=sc>myrrh</hi>; cool, increases knowledge; creates appetite; improves a relish for food; cleanses the uterus; beneficial in disorders of the blood and bile, and in Juzam.

<p id=p228><ab type=parNum>228</ab> <hi rend=sc>Podeena</hi> <UR>pUdynA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Mentha Sativa</hi>, W. <hi>Mentha Crissa</hi>, Murray, ii. 178, <hi>Mentha viridis</hi>, Woodville, iii. 463.&rdquo; Arabic, <hi>Nana</hi>. It is hot and dry; promotes digestion; allays vomiting from phlegm; is vermifuge, peculiarly aphrodisiac; increases eye-sight, and is astringent.

<p id=p229><ab type=parNum>229</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phalisae</hi> <UR>p-hlysAI</UR> or <hi>Phálsa</hi>.&mdash;The fruit of a tree of Hindoostan, of two kinds. One sweet, the other acid; the first is called <hi>Shukurie</hi>, the second <hi>Sherbuttee</hi>. The tree of one is small, not above a yard high. The other is as large as a mulberry tree. The fruit of the acid kind is the largest; its leaves large, round, and partially indented. The fruit is at first green, and astringent; when nearly ripe it is rich, and when it arrives at maturity it assumes a dark-purple color; when red, it is very acid; and when purple, of a sweetish acidity. The fruit is like the nightshade berry, or even larger. It is very grateful to the taste, and beneficial in disorders arising from a redundance of bile and blood; loosens phlegm, and is less prejudicial than any other <pb id=pb47 n=47>acid fruits. It is also astringent; allays thirst; strengthens the stomach and system. Its sherbet is excellent in strengthening the circulation, and removing depression of spirits in heat, fever, and giving tone to the stomach. It is also recommended in many other disorders. Its sherbet is a corrector of the mogane. If 48 grains of the bark of the root of the sweet Phálsa be infused for a night in water, and then rubbed and strained, the infusion forms an excellent remedy in ardor urinæ and gonorrh&oelig;a; yet the sweet kind is less cooling than the acid species, though I have found the former the most effectual in giving strength to the circulation and to the stomach. The expressed juice of the Phálsa in water, boiled, is used as a condiment.

<p id=p230><ab type=parNum>230</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhangra</hi> <UR>b-hAngrA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Eclipta</hi>, or <hi>Verbesina Prostrata</hi>. A small creeping plant; its flowers very minute. Some of them white, others of a dark color; the leaves small, in branches and leaves resembling the mint. Another species is called <hi>Kookur Bhangra</hi>; the plant of which is high, long, and large. It is found at the bottom of old walls. It is bitter, hot, pungent, and dry; cleanses the skin; cures affections of wind, phlegm, complaints of the eyes, pains in the head and Juzam. It forms an ingredient in many famous formulæ. If it be dug up <corr sic=from resp=errata>by</corr> the roots on a Sunday, and dried in the shade; washed seven times in the <hi>Bale</hi> sherbet, and as often dried in the shade; and as much as may be contained in the palm of the hand, be eaten daily by those afflicted with white leprosy <corr sic="or" resp=errata>and</corr> Juzam, the disorders will be removed. The seed bruised with black Till and sugar, and eaten, will strengthen the senses of hearing and seeing, and will promote longevity. If during the four rainy months, the Bhangra be used with the hurrha, bhaera, and anula, in equal parts, and a fourth part of peepul, every disorder will be removed, and the hair will become black.

<p>In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, it is said, that Bhangra is a shrub, like the Anjedan, but somewhat larger, of a purple or reddish color; disagreeable to the taste; hot, and dry. Of this there are three kinds: a yellow, green, and black; it improves the eye-sight, is beneficial in phlegm and swellings, white leprosy, Juzam, burns, <pb id=pb48 n=48>and black spots in the face. Recent writers have said much of the virtues of the black kind; its seed is in its properties equal; beneficial in disorders of wind, phlegm, foulness of blood, blisters, and difficulty of breathing. If for 50 days nine masha be pounded, bruised, and taken in water, the hair will not become white. If the plant (black) be dried in the shade, and six masha be taken for two months, it will blacken the hair. It is the best external application for colouring the hair.&mdash;<hi>See Singia.</hi>

<p id=p231><ab type=parNum>231</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phirrhud</hi> <UR>p-hr-hd</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree in India. Vermifuge; it cures flatulency, disorders of mucus and blood. An antidote to poisons; induces corpulency, and remedies seminal weakness.

<p id=p232><ab type=parNum>232</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoje Puttur</hi> <UR>p-hUj ptr</UR>, called also <hi>Burje Puttur</hi>, (the birch bark.)&mdash;A tree common in Cashmere; the bark of which may be separated into numerous layers, like the talc, and each layer resembles paper.&mdash;The layers are variegated, and colored with straight lines; white and red. The Cashmerians use it as paper; in its medical properties, it is beneficial in disorders of phlegm, bile, and blood; ear-ache, and possession by evil spirits. In India it is used for making hookah snakes; and if clothes be lined with it, it will prevent them from being stained with perspiration. In Persian, it is called <hi>Tooze</hi>.

<p id=p233><ab type=parNum>233</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoum amulek</hi> <UR>b-hUm Amlk</UR>.&mdash;The anula tree, without the principal root; it is bitter and astringent, cool, and producing flatulence; it allays thirst, cough, disorders of bile, blood, and phlegm; it cures marasmus, and is useful in hurts.

<p id=p234><ab type=parNum>234</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phoje</hi> <UR>p-hUj</UR>.&mdash;Cool and heavy, astringent and useful in bilious eruptions, and disorders from phlegm.

<p id=p235><ab type=parNum>235</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pockurmool</hi> <UR>pk'rmUl</UR>.&mdash;A root; bitter, pungent, hot and stomachic; useful in disorders of wind and phlegm, in fevers, swellings, difficulty of breathing, and in affections of the liver.

<p id=p236><ab type=parNum>236</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bharingee</hi> <UR>b-hAryngI</UR>.&mdash;The bark of a tree in the hills; bitter, pungent, hot, and dry; promotes appetite; remedies disorders of indigestion, swellings, cough, disorders of wind, phlegm, difficulty of breathing, fever, and pains in the uterus.

<p id=p237><ab type=parNum>237</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhær</hi> <UR>b-hyr</UR>.&mdash;The name for a sheep, called also <hi>Mendha</hi>.

<p id=p238><ab type=parNum>238</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhains</hi> <corr sic="<URA>bnys</URA>" resp=errata><UR>byns</UR></corr>.&mdash;The Buffalo, called also <hi>Mahaki</hi>.

<pb id=pb49 n=49><p id=p239><ab type=parNum>239</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bheria</hi> <UR>b-hy'ryA</UR>.&mdash;The Wolf; also named <hi>Bhuddha</hi>. Its flesh is heavy, beneficial in disorders of wind, in affections of the eye, and clears the voice. Its teeth rubbed down in water forms an effectual application in specks of the cornea. This was used by my father with success. If the teeth be suspended from the neck of a child, it will preserve the child from the effects of an evil eye. A. <hi>Zeeb</hi>. P. <hi>Goorg</hi>.

<p id=p240><ab type=parNum>240</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phunjeetuck</hi> <UR>p-hn jytk</UR>.&mdash;A species of <hi>Loonia</hi>; a culinary green.

<p id=p241><ab type=parNum>241</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhuhira</hi> <UR>bxyrA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Terminalia <hi>Bellerica</hi>, (Roxb. MS.) <hi>Beleric myrobalan</hi>. P. <hi>Beyleyleh</hi>.&rdquo; In taste it is astringent; grateful during the process of digestion; hot, dry, and beneficial in disorders of phlegm, bile, and cough; strengthens the eyes, hair of the head, and the brain. It produces a slight degree of intoxication. A. <hi>Baleludje</hi>.

<p id=p242><ab type=parNum>242</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhelawj</hi> <UR>b-hylAj</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Bela</hi>, <hi>Semicarpus Anacardium</hi>.&rdquo; It is astringent and sweet to the taste; hot and light. It promotes appetite; is aphrodisiac; cures disorders of the wind and phlegm; useful in dropsy, flatulence, Juzam, piles, diarrh&oelig;a, Badgola, fever, and white leprosy. It is vermifuge, and used in boils and eruptions. A. <hi>Bilâdoúr</hi>.

<p>I have found that its kernel used as an ingredient in a decoction intended to promote aphrodisia, (having used it myself,) is effectual; it strengthens the stomach and powers of virility, and cures colds beyond any other medicine.

<p>A friend of mine had a very severe cold in his head, for which he had taken much medicine without relief. I first gave him the Nux Vomica to supplant the habit of eating opium, to which he had become addicted: from this he derived partial benefit; but it soon became as difficult to refrain from this as from the opium. I then gave him the kernel of the Bela made into pills with honey, and cured him of his disorder.

<p>I also gave it to a woman who had a swelling on both sides of the uterus, which was daily increasing, and this it also cured.

<p>In short, this is a drug, that when it agrees with the patient, no medicine is equal in efficacy; but when it disagrees, no drug is more prejudicial. It will be prudent not to give it to any one of a hot temperament.

<pb id=pb50 n=50><p id=p243><ab type=parNum>243</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoom Kajoor</hi> <UR>b-hUm kj-hUr</UR>.&mdash;A tree as tall as the <hi>Taar</hi> tree. The stem rough and serrated; the leaves only growing at the top; they are long and hard, and used in making mats. The tree is also called <hi>Pinkajoor</hi>. It is sweet, cool, and moist; it allays pain, and is an excellent application in bruises. It is beneficial in disorders of blood, wind, bile, and debility. The <hi>Pinkajoor</hi> is brought from Mooltan or <hi>Tattla</hi>, and in A. is called <hi>Rittub</hi>.

<p>The <hi>Rittub</hi>, which is brought from Mecca, is aphrodisiac; strengthens the <sic corr=kidneys>kidnies</sic>, back, tone of the stomach, and corrects a cold phlegmatic temperament. This is ascertained from experience. It also increases the volume of blood; but if much is used, it produces a fermentation therein, unless habit has rendered it innocent.

<p id=p244><ab type=parNum>244</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhehi</hi> <UR>bxI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The Quince. The seed very mucilaginous, and excellent in diarrh&oelig;a and dysentery.&rdquo; A species of pear, of a yellow color.

<p id=p245><ab type=parNum>245</ab> <hi rend=sc>Boochitter</hi> <UR>bUchtr</UR>.&mdash;Some call it <hi>Beechittúr</hi>; it is cool and heavy, aperient, strengthening, increasing the three principal secretions. A. <hi>Jamarookh</hi> and <hi>Koombi</hi>; also <hi>Gagundool</hi>, vide K.

<p id=p246><ab type=parNum>246</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhuiteroor</hi> <UR>b-hU'yI trUr</UR>.&mdash;Whoever shall use this as their only food for one month, their youth will be prolonged, and their hair remain black. It will strengthen the solids, and give universal strength. If it be ate for 40 days, it will produce a sweet smell from the body. It is laxative, and in A. called <hi>Soonamookey</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Cassia Senna.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p247><ab type=parNum>247</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoeperus</hi> <UR>b-hUI prs</UR>.&mdash;A name of honey.

<p id=p248><ab type=parNum>248</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhang</hi> <UR>b-hAng</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Canabis Sativa</hi>;&rdquo; a name for <hi>Kainib</hi>, called also <hi>Bidjia</hi>; it is pungent, bitter, hot, light, and astringent; it promotes appetite, cures disorders of phlegm, produces idiotism; is the cause of foolish speech and conduct, or in other words, it intoxicates; if used in excess it produces fever, and it increases all the deleterious effects of poison.

<p>The author of the <hi>Dhará Shekoi</hi> says, that when he was digging the foundation of a house in Bengal, he found a board, on which the effects of this drug was written, and on this it was recorded, that Mahadeo used constantly to eat of this, and that from its use, he derived the wonderful aphrodisiac power, with <pb id=pb51 n=51>which he was gifted; he says he has tried it, and found it very beneficial.

<p>Take of <hi>Bidjia</hi> 64 tolahs, when the sun is in the division <hi>Sirtaam</hi>, white sugar 32 tolahs, and pure honey 16 tolahs, cow&apos;s ghee 34 tolahs. First fry the Bidjia in the ghee, then add the honey in a boiling state, afterwards the sugar: use this in moderate doses daily, and when it has been used for two months, strength and intelligence will have become increased, and every propensity of youth restored; the eye-sight cleared, and all eruptions of the skin removed; it will prove an exemption from convulsions and debility, and preserve the bowels at all times in a state of order. It will likewise give an additional zest for food.

<p id=p249><ab type=parNum>249</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoom Kudum</hi> <UR>b-hUm kdm</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Kudum</hi>.

<p id=p250><ab type=parNum>250</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhendi</hi> <UR>b-hn'dI</UR>.&mdash;A very common vegetable of the culinary kind, from 2 to 3 inches in height: very mucilaginous. It is sweet; produces wind and phlegm; it diminishes bile; is diuretic, and increases the seminal secretion. &ldquo;<hi>Hibiscus Esculentus.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p251><ab type=parNum>251</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phaar</hi> <UR>p-hAr</UR>.&mdash;The author of the <hi>Cashmee</hi> calls it the medicine of <hi>Shaik Furried</hi>, because it was a great favorite of his. It is common at Agra and Delhi; it is bitter, and difficult of digestion, and hot; it cures fever from phlegm and bile, also diarrh&oelig;a and indigestion, and cholicky pains in the bowels. Its virtues are many, but too numerous for the compass of this work. The people of Hindost&apos;han use it as a culinary vegetable with much benefit.

<p id=p252><ab type=parNum>252</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhindale</hi> <corr sic="<URA>bxndAlyA</URA>" resp=errata><UR>bxndAlI</UR></corr>.&mdash;The name of <hi>Bhindal</hi>.

<p id=p253><ab type=parNum>253</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phankra</hi> <UR>p-hAnk'rA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Mahomed Cassim</hi> says, that this tree is the <hi>Dársheeshán</hi>, and that the name of its bark is <hi>Kagphill</hi>; it is hot, and easy of digestion; it lessens the secretion of wind and phlegm. It is aperient, and corrects a bad taste in the mouth.

<p id=p254><ab type=parNum>254</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhapungi</hi> <UR>b-hApUngI</UR>.&mdash;The author of the <hi>Cashmee</hi> says, that this is the <hi>Anjidan Roomi</hi>. It is pungent bitter, and hot, and is useful in removing coughs from phlegm, asthma, swellings, wounds, worms in the stomach, heat, and fever.

<p id=p255><ab type=parNum>255</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phitkerrie</hi> <UR>pxtkArI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Sulphate of Alumine</hi>, <hi>Alumen</hi>. F. <hi>Alaun</hi>, G. <hi>Allume</hi>, I. <hi>Alumbre</hi>. S. <hi>Sphatica</hi>. <hi>Shan Shub</hi>, A.&rdquo; Pungent, astringent, transparent. It increases and clears the <pb id=pb52 n=52>complexion; is beneficial in seminal weakness and dysuria, in all complaints of the vagina, in vomiting, and in thirst.

<p id=p256><ab type=parNum>256</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bheroza</hi> <UR>bhyrUzA</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Gundha Bheroza</hi>, (Turpentine.) In its properties it approaches the <hi>Koondhur</hi>; but its effects are more drying. If a tent be made with this, and applied or introduced into the vagina, it will cure any affection to which that may be subject, and prevent habitual abortion.

<p id=p257><ab type=parNum>257</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhateele</hi> <UR>bA'tyl</UR>.&mdash;In Persian called <hi>Goolqunda</hi>. A. <hi>Verdmoonuttin</hi>.

<p id=p258><ab type=parNum>258</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoodill</hi> <UR>bdyl</UR>.&mdash;The name of a piece of <hi>Talc</hi>.

<p id=p259><ab type=parNum>259</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhoothpees</hi> <UR>bhUtx"hpys</UR>.&mdash;A name for the Ram.

<p id=p260><ab type=parNum>260</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phaloke</hi> <UR>phAlU'k</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Arloo</hi>.

<p id=p261><ab type=parNum>261</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhu&apos;th Kutaeye</hi> <UR>bx't k'tyA</UR>.&mdash;The name of both kinds of <hi>Kutai</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Solanum Jacquini</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p262><ab type=parNum>262</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhohphilly</hi> <UR>bhUphylI</UR>.&mdash;A creeping grass, the fibres of which are very thin, and its leaves very small. Its seed vessels are numerous, thin, and small, about the size of the nail of the finger; it is aphrodisiac, and thickens the seminal fluid.

<p id=p263><ab type=parNum>263</ab> <hi rend=sc>Phooth</hi> <UR>phUtx"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cucumis Momordica</hi>,&rdquo; (Roxb.) P. <hi>Dustumb&oelig;ah</hi>. Its properties approach those of the melon when unripe. In my opinion, as nature has given it a sweet smell, it must be beneficial in strengthening the heart and brain; but it encourages the attack of putrid fever. It is used to form a sherbet with sugar and rose-water, for the above-mentioned beneficial purposes.

<p id=p264><ab type=parNum>264</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bhuntaki</hi> <UR>bhn'tAkI</UR>.&mdash;(&ldquo;The wild <hi>Bhengun</hi>; is the Solanum Melongena,&rdquo;) a name for <hi>Badinjan</hi>; sweet, pungent, and penetrating, and during digestion, bitter, hot, and light; beneficial in diminishing phlegm and bile, strengthens the circulation, clears the complexion, promotes appetite, and cures fever and cough.

<p>When ripe, it is hot and heavy, and increases the bilious secretion. The white kind is inferior in virtue to the black. Some call it hot, others cold. I have from experience found it excellent in giving strength to the stomach; that it is very drying, and produces vitiated bile; from this circumstance it prevents sleep, or produces unpleasant dreams: its correctors are ghee or oil. Although I have stated all these properties, yet as a culinary vegetable it is in very general use, it cannot possess them in any great degree; it is called <hi>Benghun</hi>.

<pb id=pb53 n=53><p id=p265><ab type=parNum>265</ab> <hi rend=sc>Pechuck</hi> <UR>pychk</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Bidjosaar</hi>.

<p id=p266><ab type=parNum>266</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beedjbund</hi> <corr sic="<URA>b-hnyj bnd</URA>" resp=errata><UR>byj bnd</UR></corr>.&mdash;(From the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>.) A medicine of India, red and black; its seed resembles that of the onion, red and shining; the red kind is to be preferred. It is aphrodisiac, increases seminal secretion, strengthens the back and loins. It is cool and dry, flatulent and difficult of digestion; its corrector is sugar; its sucoedaneum, the seed of the <hi>Antungun</hi>. The dose is one miskal with equal parts of sugar.

<p id=p267><ab type=parNum>267</ab> <hi rend=sc>Benth</hi> <corr sic="<URA>by'tx"h</URA>" resp=errata><UR>byn"h</UR></corr>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Calamus Rotang.</hi>&rdquo; Of this there are many kinds; one kind called <hi>Toæikam</hi>, another <hi>Jillbenth</hi>, a fourth <hi>Itchill</hi>; the whole four are cool and cure swellings, piles, pains in the uterus, boils, eruptions, acne, difficulty in voiding urine, <corr sic="lithonthriptic," resp=errata>are lithonthriptic, useful in</corr> affections of wind and mucus, also foulness of blood. Jillbenth is astringent and flatulent, and Itchill is an antidote to poison.

<p id=p268><ab type=parNum>268</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peetul</hi> <UR>pytl</UR>.&mdash;(Brass.) P. <hi>Bering</hi>. It is not an original metal, but a composition. In its properties it is equally cool, hot, and dry; it cures disorders of wind, phlegm, jaundice, and affections of the spleen. A kind of this is called Sonepeetul.

<p id=p269><ab type=parNum>269</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peepul</hi> <UR>pypl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Ficus Religiosa.</hi>&rdquo; A tree of India, very large and common; the young leaves are green, but when well formed become yellowish; it is cool; cures disorders of bile, phlegm, and blood; is useful in boils and eruptions. The bark of the tree is aphrodisiac, strengthens the loins, and restrains watery discharge from the urethra; and this I have found from experience. Some say, this is called in P. Lirzan. Its fruit is about twice the size of the Phaìsa. It tastes like the fig. It is called <hi>Peepulie</hi>, and is when ripe of a yellowish color. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, it is thus mentioned. &ldquo;The Peepul tree in Persian is called Lirzan; in the opinion of the inhabitants of India, cool and dry. Its fruit diminishes the secretion of bile, promotes digestion, relaxes the bowels; and if the bark be infused in water and applied to boils, it will hasten suppuration and promote the discharge of the matter; if the bark be burnt and thrown into water, it will quickly purify it.&rdquo;

<p id=p270><ab type=parNum>270</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bale</hi> <UR>byl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Raebale</hi>; cool and light; cures disorders of phlegm, and is an antidote to poisons.

<pb id=pb54 n=54><p id=p271><ab type=parNum>271</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baele</hi> <corr sic="<URA>bylI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>byl</UR></corr>.&mdash;&ldquo;Called also <hi>Byll</hi>, <hi>Crat&oelig;va</hi>, or <hi>Ægle Marmelos</hi>; Wood Apple.&rdquo; The name of a fruit which grows like the quince; its seeds are larger than those of the <hi>Ryhan</hi>. I have seen the tree, it is like the <hi>Bukaen</hi>; its leaves very soft and tender, broad and long, somewhat like the Moong: on each small sprig it has three leaves. Some have said that it was originally wild, but subsequently brought into our gardens; that which is now in gardens is larger than that which grows uncultivated. The fruit is hollowed out and used as snuff-boxes, and for several other purposes. It is a very common tree in India; it is bitter, astringent, and a little sweetish, hot, and moist; when ripe it is heavy, producing phlegm, bile, and wind, causing heat of stomach, and is difficult of digestion. It destroys appetite and induces costiveness; but unripe it is light, strengthens the circulation, and the whole body; induces costiveness; increases appetite, hastens digestion, and cures disorders of wind and phlegm. I have given it with other medicines for the cure of diarrh&oelig;a with good effect. &ldquo;And in dysentery, a table-spoonful of the pulp, made into sherbet, and taken several times a day, has been effectual.&rdquo;

<p id=p272><ab type=parNum>272</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peeloo</hi> <UR>pylU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Salvadora Persica.</hi>&rdquo; &ldquo;Careya Arborea,&rdquo; (Roxb.) The Indian name for this, Araak. It is a wild growing shrub, about the height of a long spear, (8 feet,) with many branches; it is broad and round in its general appearances; its leaves thin, and about &frac12; an inch long. The fruit is called Peel or Peeludj; it is hot, light, and aperient; promotes appetite, cures Badgola, piles, affections of the spleen and wind; is lithonthriptic; useful in disorders of the blood; it produces bile, and in all favorite formulæ, it forms an ingredient. The fruit is also called Jhal; it is bitter, laxative, lessens phlegm<corr sic=", bile" resp=errata></corr>, general heat, Juzam, fever, and worms. The wood of the Peeloo used as a tooth-brush, is excellent for preserving the gums.

<p id=p273><ab type=parNum>273</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peoke</hi> <UR>pyU'k</UR>, or <hi>Peossie</hi>.&mdash;The first milk given by any animal after the birth of its young. A. <hi>Lubba</hi>. It increases the bulk of the solids, and inclination towards aphrodisia, but it causes hiccough, and the formation of stone in the bladder, and is difficult of digestion; its corrector is sweetmeats.

<p id=p274><ab type=parNum>274</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peease</hi> <UR>pyAz pyAs</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Allium Cepa. Agnon</hi>, F. <hi>Swiebel</hi>, G. <pb id=pb55 n=55><hi>Cipolla</hi>, I. <hi>Pallandoo</hi>, S. <hi>Onion</hi>.&rdquo; A. <hi>Bosool</hi>. Pungent, and during digestion sweet; hot in a small degree, and in its effects resembling Garlic. It increases mucus, removes disorders of wind, and hydrocele. There is a smaller sort, called <hi>Karinjun</hi>, which increases bile, produces costiveness, and cures piles. There is a third kind, which when dried is white, and is recommended to be kept in any house to prevent the approach of snakes or any venomous reptiles.

<p id=p275><ab type=parNum>275</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peeplamool</hi> <UR>pypl mUl</UR>.&mdash;The name given to the root of the Peepul tree, but some give the name to the whole tree, and some give the name to the fibres of the root of any tree; but judging from the name, I conceive it to be what I have just stated. Mool being root, and Peepul must indicate the kind of root. The idiom is Indian, and I think must be correct. It is bitter and pungent, dry and stomachic; promotes digestion, cures disorders of wind and phlegm, but impairs the eye-sight and seminal secretions.

<p id=p276><ab type=parNum>276</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bear</hi> <UR>byAr</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Konar</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Ziziphus Jujuba</hi>.&rdquo; Sweet, cool, heavy, aperient, causes wind, produces corpulency, cures disorders of bile, wind, blood, general heat, and the disease called <hi>Rajerogue</hi>; also allays thirst. Another kind of this, named <hi>Husthkool</hi>, and a third called <hi>Kurkund</hi>, q. vide.

<p id=p277><ab type=parNum>277</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peeta</hi> <UR>py'tA</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Khunda</hi>, q. vide.

<p id=p278><ab type=parNum>278</ab> <hi rend=sc>Passownie</hi> <UR>pAsUnI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Chírkákólie</hi>.

<p id=p279><ab type=parNum>279</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bealduntuck</hi> <UR>byAldntk</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Khárkhúsuck</hi>, meaning a snake&apos;s tooth. This is known to every one.

<p id=p280><ab type=parNum>280</ab> <hi rend=sc>Peeche</hi> <UR>pych</UR>.&mdash;Congee, or rice water; it is cool and allays thirst; it is proper food for the sick; drank with rose water, <hi>Beelemoosk</hi> and sugar, or with pomegranate sherbet, it produces cold, strengthens the circulation, and entirely allays general heat.

<p id=p281><ab type=parNum>281</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beerbahootie</hi> <UR>byrbAhU'tI</UR>.&mdash;An insect very common in the rainy season, resembling scarlet velvet; hot in the 3rd and moist in the 2nd deg. One insect, with the legs taken off, ate with Paan, is very efficacious in paralytic disorders, and other complaints from cold. Bruised and mixed with water, it is used as an aphrodisiac, in seminal weakness, &amp;c. Its oil is also used as an external application in debility brought on by onanism, and for giving strength to the muscular fibres. Its succed. is the Kinchua.

<pb id=pb56 n=56><p>&ldquo;I have prescribed the <hi>Beerbahootie</hi> with decided good effects in paralysis, commencing with one and increasing to three or four in the day: 1 or 2 given with a little pounded nutmeg is said to be very efficacious in spasms in the bowels of children.&rdquo;



<div1 id=teh>
<head><UR>t</UR></head>


<p id=p282><ab type=parNum>282</ab> <hi rend=sc>Talmukara</hi> <UR>tAl mkArA</UR>, or <hi>Talmukana</hi> <UR>tAl mk-hAn"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Bartleria longifolia.</hi>&rdquo; A seed, very small, and like the <hi>zeera</hi>, red, the color of <hi>Toodrie</hi>, but the <hi>Toodrie</hi> is round, whereas this is longish and smaller. The plant is knotted like a reed, and has prickles on the joints. The flower is like the lotus, but is whiter. It is cool and heavy; increases seminal secretion, and cures disorders of wind and blood; it forms an ingredient in all aphrodisiac formulæ; it is taken mixed with cow&apos;s milk, either cold or boiled. In the <hi>Maadentezerrabad</hi>, it is thus described.

<p><hi>Talmukana</hi> is a medicine of India; its seed of a brown color, like that of the Anjera; cool and moist; used as an aphrodisiac, in cases of seminal weakness, in gonorrh&oelig;a, and in chancres. It is astringent; strengthens the system; is flatulent, and not easy of digestion: its corrector is sugar; its succed. Moosliesia. The dose six masha.

<p id=p283><ab type=parNum>283</ab> <hi rend=sc>Taal</hi> <UR>tAl</UR>, or <hi>Taar</hi>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Borassus Flabelliformis.</hi>&rdquo; A very high tree, about 60 feet, more or less; very common in the Deccan and in Bengal. At Agra it is more common than at Delhi; the leaves grow at the top of the stem; they are broad and long; and of these are formed Punkahs, which are much esteemed and carried to various parts. They are also used for writing upon; its fruit is like the cocoanut; the kernel of the fruit is cut into pieces, and ate with sherbet and sugar; it is very sweet to the taste, and is called the Tirkool.

<p>The upper part of the stem of the fruit is cut across, and the liquid which exudes from the wound, received into earthen vessels called Labnahs, and these fill several times in the course of the day. This liquor is called Taarie: when fresh drawn and before the sun is above the horizon, it is sweet to the taste; but it soon becomes fermented, and is then intoxicating. It is cool and moist, beneficial in disorders of wind and bile, also in boils and eruptions. It is both aperient, and aphrodisiac. A liquor distilled from the Taarie, is to be preferred: roasted or stewed meat should <pb id=pb57 n=57>be eaten along with it. It produces pains in the limbs, and heaviness of the head, and is as intoxicating as spirits. The fruit is sweet and cool, heavy and flatulent, causes pains in the limbs, cures affections of wind, bile, blood, and bruises; it relieves general heat, and allays thirst. Its seed is also sweet, cool, and diuretic; useful in disorders of wind and bile. P. Khoormae Aboojile, or Khoormae Hindee. A. it is called Doom, but the author of the <hi>Munhage</hi> says, that Doom means the Googul tree. The <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi> thus describes it: taar is a tree like the date tree; its leaves about a yard long; the kernel of the fruit is often sold for the sea cocoanut. The juice of this tree is the taarie, so well known; it is equally hot and cold, and moist in the 2nd degree. It is aphrodisiac and diuretic, induces corpulency, and if taken to excess produces intoxication and head-ache. If fresh drawn, it is sweet and less intoxicating; but allowed to remain for a night, it becomes acid, and then it is very inebriating. The fresh taarie improves the complexion, moistens the brain; is beneficial in hectic fever, in difficulty of breathing, in depression of the spirits, and is aperient. If allowed to remain long, it becomes sour, smells very strong; is heating, and causes vomiting and indigestion.

<p>In the Lyzuttoor rejal, it is thus mentioned: taarrie is an intoxicating produce of the taar tree, very common to the eastward. The tree resembles the date tree, but its leaves are different: when fresh, the taarie is hot and moist, induces corpulency; is aphrodisiac, diuretic, and when it has acquired a strong smell, is intoxicating, and in that state, it is very heating, and produces indigestion, with heaviness of the brain. The sherbet of the pomegranate allays vomiting brought on by its use. Its succedaneum is a decoction of dates called Sendhi.

<p id=p284><ab type=parNum>284</ab> <hi rend=sc>Taalesputter</hi> <UR>tAlsh ptr</UR>.&mdash;A name of <hi>Talesphir</hi>; of this there are many and various accounts, some call it the leaf of the wild olive, <hi>zeatoon</hi>, and others call it the bark of the <hi>Lissaan nulaej safeer</hi>, or <hi>Biss&apos;bassa</hi>. The author of the <hi>Topha</hi> says, that he considers it the same as the <hi>Tewaje Kutai</hi>. The people of India deem it hot, light, aphrodisiac, stomachic, promoting digestion, curing difficulty of breathing, cough, disorders of phlegm, badgola, and hectic fever.

<pb id=pb58 n=58><p id=p285><ab type=parNum>285</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tanbirr</hi> <UR>tAnbr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Copper.</hi>&rdquo; It is sweet, cool, light, and aperient: cures disorders of bile and phlegm; useful in marasmus, Juzam, piles, asthma, swellings, cough, and ague. It is caustic, and in A. is called Nowhass. P. Miss. The physicians of India use it in a calcined form, and speak much in its favour. If it be properly prepared, it will be soluble in water. In my opinion, if it does not produce heat in the blood, nausea, pains in the bones, and joints, giddiness, and confusion of ideas, it will be fortunate, and will be a sign, that it has been well prepared; and should it stand both these tests, it may be used with comparative safety.

<p id=p286><ab type=parNum>286</ab> <hi rend=sc>Taberuck</hi> <UR>tbr'k</UR>.&mdash;A tree, the produce of Arabia; its fruit and flower resembling the rose; during digestion it is bitter and hot; removes bile, and blisters, and seminal debility.

<p id=p287><ab type=parNum>287</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tubasheer</hi> <UR>tbA shyr</UR>, or <hi>Tubakeer</hi>, names of <hi>Bunslochun</hi>.

<p id=p288><ab type=parNum>288</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tuputtee</hi> <UR>tptI</UR> or <hi>Typsie</hi>, a trefoil grass.

<p id=p289><ab type=parNum>289</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tatyrie</hi> <UR>t-tyrI</UR>, in P. called <hi>Teetoo</hi>; a bird, the meat of which produces wind. &ldquo;<hi>Tringa Goensis.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p290><ab type=parNum>290</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tittereek</hi> <UR>t-tryk</UR>, sometimes called <hi>Tintereek</hi>.&mdash;Its fruit, when unripe, is beneficial in disorders of wind; is vermifuge, and destroys worms in the rectum; it is very heavy; but when ripe, is light and astringent, and is useful in weakness of the digestive organs, and cures disorders of phlegm and wind. A. Simaak.

<p id=p291><ab type=parNum>291</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tudje</hi> <UR>tjI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Laurus Cassie?</hi> Some say that this is <hi>Kirfa</hi>, and others <hi>Syleekha</hi>; also called <hi>Keelkheela</hi>; it is in Indian works described as cool and pungent; it cures disorders of phlegm, and more especially dissipates collections of it in the small intestines; clears the passage to the stomach or &oelig;sophagus, and promotes digestion.

<p id=p292><ab type=parNum>292</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tedhara</hi> <UR>td-hArA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Euphorbia Antiquorum.</hi>&rdquo; A kind of <hi>Seehund</hi>.

<p id=p293><ab type=parNum>293</ab> <hi rend=sc>Turkool</hi> <UR>trkUl</UR>.&mdash;The fruit of the Taar tree, vide <hi>Taal</hi>.

<p id=p294><ab type=parNum>294</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tarkoota</hi> <UR>trkUtA</UR>, or <hi>Terookhun</hi>.&mdash;The title of a formulæ composed of <hi>peepul</hi>, pepper, and ginger, in equal parts. It creates appetite and promotes digestion; cures difficulty of breathing, cough, local affections of the skin, badgola, seminal weakness, phlegm, swelling of the testicles, and diseases of the nostrils.

<p id=p295><ab type=parNum>295</ab> <hi rend=sc>Terisgundh</hi> <corr sic="<URA>tyrsUgnd"h</URA>" resp=errata><UR>tyrs gnd"h</UR></corr> or <hi>Tirjatuck</hi>.&mdash;The name of the following <pb id=pb59 n=59>formulæ. Small cardamums, <hi>Kerfa</hi>, <hi>Tezpat</hi>, in equal parts. It is said to remedy disorders of phlegm.

<p id=p296><ab type=parNum>296</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tirtuck</hi> <UR>trtk</UR>.&mdash;A kind of rice, of the same properties as the <hi>Saathie</hi>.

<p id=p297><ab type=parNum>297</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tirmirra</hi> <UR>trmrA</UR>.&mdash;The best kind of this grows in gardens. It is hot in the 2nd degree, dry in the 1st. When fresh, it is moist, and its juice is excellent in wounds and ulcers; it is diuretic and aperient; produces frequent inclination to aphrodisia, and causes blindness. Its corrector is Káou (Lettuce), or Kasni (Endive), or Koorfa, or Till. It increases the secretion of semen, and thickens its consistence. It is an antidote to the bite of the mongoose. If bruised and applied to the root of the acid pomegranate it will render it sweet. A. <hi>Jerjeer</hi>.

<p id=p298><ab type=parNum>298</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tersindiaturnie</hi> <UR>trsydyAtrnI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Jeeaphul</hi>; see I.

<p id=p299><ab type=parNum>299</ab> <hi rend=sc>Teraemanna</hi> <UR>trmAn-nA</UR>, called also <hi>Teraman</hi>.&mdash;It is cool, sweet, and useful in pains of the stomach, in mucus, super-abundance of blood, giddiness, thirst, delirium, poisons, and vomiting. Manna.

<p id=p300><ab type=parNum>300</ab> <hi rend=sc>Teroor</hi> <UR>trUr</UR>, called also great <hi>Dathun</hi>.&mdash;Bitter and cool; strengthens eye-sight; cures bile, heat, diseases of the mouth and hepatic eruptions.

<p id=p301><ab type=parNum>301</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tirnie</hi> <UR>trnI</UR>.&mdash;Cool and sweet, increasing eye-sight, beneficial in bilious disorders, bile, heat, thirst, vomiting, and eruptions of the mouth.

<p id=p302><ab type=parNum>302</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tirdisha</hi> <UR>trdshA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mahomeed</hi>.

<p id=p303><ab type=parNum>303</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tyrphilla</hi> <UR>trpxlA</UR>.&mdash;The name for <hi>Hurr</hi>, <hi>Bhaera</hi>, and <hi>Anula</hi>.

<p id=p304><ab type=parNum>304</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tirpurnie</hi> <UR>trpUnI</UR>.&mdash;An appellation for <hi>Jalpurnie</hi> or <hi>Tirpunnie</hi>.

<p id=p305><ab type=parNum>305</ab> <hi rend=sc>Takkur</hi> <UR>tkr</UR>.&mdash;The name given to a mixture of Dhaie and water.

<p id=p306><ab type=parNum>306</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tuggur</hi> <UR>tgr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Asaroon</hi> (<hi>Asarabece</hi>); it is sweet, hot, moist, light, and an antidote to poisons. It cures epilepsy, delirium, affections of the eyes, wind, and mucus. One kind of it is red. (<hi>Asarum</hi>), excellent errhine.

<p id=p307><ab type=parNum>307</ab> <hi rend=sc>Teluck</hi> <UR>tlk</UR>.&mdash;A flower like the <hi>Till</hi>; hot, beneficial in mucous disorders, and Juzam; an ingredient in favourite formulæ.

<p id=p308><ab type=parNum>308</ab> <hi rend=sc>Telk</hi> <UR>tl'k</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Ginger.</hi>

<p id=p309><ab type=parNum>309</ab> <hi rend=sc>Till</hi> or <hi rend=sc>Tillee</hi> <UR>tlI</UR>.&mdash;The name of a seed, from which oil is extracted, and which leaves much refuse after the oil has been drawn. When green, it is dry, increases knowledge, and promotes <pb id=pb60 n=60>appetite. Is astringent, reduces corpulency, clears the voice and complexion, and allays thirst. There are three kinds of this, the 1st called <hi>Pooth</hi>, the 2nd <hi>Tilbund</hi>, or white Till, the 3rd is wild; it is heavy and astringent, increases mucus and bile, strengthens the head, cures boils, and all rheumatic affections. Is stomachic, increases knowledge, and restrain the secretion of urine. The best kind is black, next the white, and last in order the red. The flower of the Till is useful in disorders of the eye, such as specks, and that affection called Nachoona, and is applied mixed with Soorma with good effect. This is stated both in the <hi>Ejalenapheh</hi> and <hi>Elajejul-umrae</hi>.

<p id=p310><ab type=parNum>310</ab> <hi rend=sc>Toolsi</hi> <UR>tlsI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Ocimum Sanctum.</hi> <corr>(</corr>Roxb. MS.) Shrubby, hairy, branches four-sided, leaves ovate, oblong, serrated with margins, and petioles hairy; bractes petioled, ovate, cordate, ciliate, upper lip of the calyx round, cordate, and hairy, with corol twice its length. Its seed, Tookmi Rehan, H. of a mucilaginous nature.&rdquo;

<p>A common plant, about a yard high or more; its leaves small and longish, and serrated at the edges. The Hindoos consider it as very sacred, and worship it. It is a species of sweet basil (<hi>Raihan</hi>); bitter, pungent, hot, cardiac, and stomachic. It increases bile and general heat, cures Juzam, difficulty in making water, affections of the liver and blood.

<p id=p311><ab type=parNum>311</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tumakoo</hi> <UR>tnbAkU</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Nicotiana Tabacum</hi>, W. It is said in the <hi>Dara Shekoi</hi>, that it was first sown in India during the reign of <hi>Akber</hi>, or in the year of the Hidjera 1014, when it was imported from Europe, and sown by his order; now it is every where common, and is generally smoked. In the opinion of Hukeem Alli Gheelanee, it is hot and dry; its smoke from its heating quality confuses the ideas, and reduces the strength; from its discutient property, it weakens the brain, and depresses the spirits. Those who are of a cold, moist temperament, may derive benefit from its use, but those who are of equal temperament cannot use it with impunity. It is useful in piles the consequence of cold, also in waterbrash, and complaints of this nature; it promotes digestion and dissipates flatulent pains. It increases the strength of vision when it is weakened by the effects of cold, but adds to it when it has been caused by heat. In difficulty of breathing or <pb id=pb61 n=61>pain in the chest, proceeding from an accumulation of viscid phlegm, it is very useful. It is prejudicial in thin spare habits; it shuts all the passages, decreases the power of the absorbents, and consequently prevents the absorption of chyle, thereby weakening the system, and drying up and emaciating the body. It produces hectic fever in the aged, and many other disorders in which medicine is useless. Its corrector, according to the author of the Dara Shekoi, is milk; and he gives this wise reason for it, that cloth stained with the smoke of tabacco can only be cleaned with milk. It is used in many ways, chewed, snuffed, smoked, &amp;c. but is least prejudicial when smoked, after being mixed up with <hi>goor</hi> and preserves. I have by experience found it effectual in wind of the stomach, in pains produced by flatulence, and in the waterbrash; but have found it prejudicial to those labouring under depression of spirits, or who are subject to heartburns.

<p>The dried plant brought from Surat is more drying than any other, and ought to be washed in rose-water or <hi>Bedemushk</hi> before use.

<p>It is used by the Pytans as snuff: as a cephalic it strengthens the brain, and prevents the effects of indigestion on that organ, but it should not be used when people have weak eyes from heat. The author of the Ulfaz Udwiyeh says, that he had a friend who was blind, and that meeting him afterwards quite recovered, he was surprised to learn that his cure had been effected by his having smoked equal parts of tobacco and <hi>Sumhaloo</hi>; the women eat the Surat tobacco with <hi>pawn</hi>: and it increases digestion, and is discutient. It is beneficial in those temperaments which are cold and moist, and its juice is used for drying the vagina.

<p id=p312><ab type=parNum>312</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tamaal</hi> <UR>tmAl</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Serroe</hi> tree. A tree resembling the <hi>Jhow</hi>, but much larger; in its properties resembling the Saul. It cures swellings, general heat, and blister.

<p id=p313><ab type=parNum>313</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tym</hi> <UR>tym</UR>.&mdash;A kind of fish, producing appetite and general strength.

<p id=p314><ab type=parNum>314</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tamaalputtur</hi> <UR>tmAl ptr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Teeridje</hi>. Some have called it the leaf of the <hi>Tamaal tree</hi>, and named it <hi>Serroe</hi>, while others have said that it was the leaf of the Sandal tree. It is therefore uncertain what it is.

<p id=p315><ab type=parNum>315</ab> <hi rend=sc>Toon</hi> <UR>tUn</UR>.&mdash;A kind of reed; its seed like the <hi>Benth</hi>; its flowers are used as a dye by the dyers of India, and are of a yellow color; <pb id=pb62 n=62>cool, dry, astringent, producing wind, curing eruptions from an overflow of bile, also other eruptions of the skin and Juzam. A. <hi>Arheekun</hi>, but the author of the Topha says, that <hi>Arheekun</hi> is a name of the <hi>Isperuck</hi>, and that it is not like the Toon.

<p id=p316><ab type=parNum>316</ab> <hi rend=sc>Toon</hi> <UR>tUn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cedrela Tuna</hi>,&rdquo; W. See Sir W. Jones&apos;s description, vol. 4. As. R. page 273. Powder of the bark and extract used in the cure of fever.

<p id=p317><ab type=parNum>317</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tuntureek</hi> <corr sic="<URA>tnyryk</URA>" resp=errata><UR>tntryk</UR></corr>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Tuttereek</hi>, called also <hi>Seemák</hi>.

<p id=p318><ab type=parNum>318</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tumbole</hi> <UR>tnbUl</UR>.&mdash;A designation for <hi>Paan</hi>, but what is properly called so is a preparation used at marriages, composed of <hi>Paan</hi> bruised and the juice expressed, mace, nutmeg, cloves, and cardamoms, all bruised and mixed with sugar, and allowed some time till it ferment. Its use causes <sic corr=exhilaration>exhiliration</sic> of spirits, slight intoxication, and strengthens the system. It removes wind, is cardiac, and promotes dryness; those of a hot and dry temperament will be injured by its use; it sweetens the breath, and is generally known by this name.

<p id=p319><ab type=parNum>319</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tunkaar</hi> <UR>tnkAr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Impure Borate of Soda</hi>, <hi>Boras Sodæ</hi>.&rdquo; A name of <hi>Borax</hi>, called also <hi>Zirkur</hi>; it is of two kinds, one white, called <hi>Curia</hi>, the other named <hi>Telia</hi>. The proportion of both are the same; it is refrigerant and detergent; strong, hot, and useful in mucus and wind, cough, and asthma. It is burnt in the fire, pounded, and with equal parts of Aloes and a little treacle made into pills, and as many used daily as will agree with the stomach. These will remove pains in the stomach, internal parts, chronic cough, difficulty of breathing, or any complaint of that nature. It is recommended, that it be taken every day for at least 20 days, but if this cannot be done, it may be used at intervals for the above-mentioned complaints; this advice is given from the Echtyarat Casmi. The whole properties of this medicine are only known to Indian physicians, and from experience, I know it to be a powerful promoter of digestion if taken about an hour after meals with a little water only; it is called also <hi>Tunkunkaár</hi>.

<p id=p320><ab type=parNum>320</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tawakeer</hi> <UR>tUAqyr</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, useful in gonorrh&oelig;a and dysuria ardens.

<pb id=pb63 n=63><p id=p321><ab type=parNum>321</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tombrir</hi> <UR>tnbryr</UR>, also <hi>Tombie</hi>.&mdash;A bitter cuddoo. There is a kind of this in which the seed is not bitter; it is heavy, though some call it light; it is aphrodisiac; cures disorders of mucus and bile.

<p>The one in which the seed is bitter, is cool, cardiac, and an antidote to poisons; useful in cough and bile. If the seed be taken when the moon is in the wane, bruised, and for 21 days, steeped in the juice of ginger, its oil extracted and preserved in a bottle, it will be found that this oil, when a year old, rubbed over the body in weakly habits will renovate strength, and it is also said that it will consolidate mercury.

<p id=p322><ab type=parNum>322</ab> <hi rend=sc>Turai</hi> <UR>trAI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cucumis Acutangulus</hi>, Roxb. <hi>Hibiscus Esculentus</hi>?&rdquo; A common vegetable, bitter and dry, light and suppurating; beneficial in swellings, marasmus, dropsy, affection of the spleen, Juzam, piles, mucous disorders, and bile. Another kind is called <hi>Geea</hi>, and is very mucilaginous and cool, but increases mucous disorders. A third kind is named <hi>Arra</hi>, and is aperient and useful in bilious disorders.

<p><hi>Turai</hi> is a very common culinary vegetable of India, and the people sow it in their houses; its flower is very beautiful, of a yellow color, and the fruit is extremely mucilaginous. If it is sown at the root of a tree or wall, it will climb for support; its leaves resemble the vine, its fruit is about 2 or 3 inches long, and about the thickness of the thumb or even thicker; the second and third kinds are larger and thicker than the first, but the latter is the best, and those are to be chosen which are thin, small, and soft. It is in my opinion cool, moist, and aperient; beneficial in hot temperaments and weakness of the stomach; those of a dry temperament will find it particularly beneficial; it is a proper food for those labouring under fever. The 2nd kind is the most mucilaginous; the 3rd less so than the 1st.

<p id=p323><ab type=parNum>323</ab> <hi rend=sc>Toour</hi> <UR>tUr</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Arhur</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Cytisus Cajan.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p324><ab type=parNum>324</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tooiekam</hi> <corr sic="<URA>tUA'yI km</URA>" resp=errata><UR>tUykAm</UR></corr>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Rattan</hi>.

<p id=p325><ab type=parNum>325</ab> <hi rend=sc>Toodun</hi> <UR>tUdn</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Kakroo</hi>.

<p id=p326><ab type=parNum>326</ab> <hi rend=sc>Toott</hi> <UR>tUt</UR>.&mdash;A common tree, of the middling size; its leaves are a little oval, very soft and easily squeezed; its fruit is half an inch long or more, both white and black, the best without seeds, and much less than the rest. It is sweet and easy of digestion, <pb id=pb64 n=64>strengthens the system and kidnies; is aphrodisiac, increases blood, remedies costiveness; is hot and dry. Those without seed, more efficient than any other. I have written what I have experienced of its effect, but much more is said of its properties in Yunani publications. Its bruised leaves with salt said to be suppurative and discutient.

<p id=p327><ab type=parNum>327</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thour</hi> <UR>t-hUr</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Euphorbia Neriifolia</hi>, Roxb. called also <hi>Thúr</hi>. A kind of <hi>Zekoom</hi>, (thorny tree,) some call it <hi>Synhud</hi>, others describe it as resembling the <hi>Zekoom</hi>, and that its fruit is like the <hi>Hurrhee</hi>, but the <hi>Thóor</hi> and <hi>Synhud</hi> do not bear fruit. The milk of the plant blisters the skin; its expressed oil is aphrodisiac, and possesses other properties. A cloth wet with the milk, is used as an aphrodisiac, and the particular manner will be found in the Ilajulumrar and the Ijalénápheh.

<p>In the <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi>, it is thus mentioned: Thewér. In the opinion of the people of India, it removes costiveness, cures affections of the spleen and spasms of the stomach, and evacuates the bowels and <hi>Fetuek</hi>; if its leaves are boiled in water or <hi>Dhaie</hi> with a little salt, strained and drank with a little cow&apos;s ghee, it will cure all disorders of wind and vitiated bile, and relax the bowels. The milk of the Thewer is procured as follows:

<p>Pierce the plant close to the root, and fill the wound during a night with asaf&oelig;tida, in the morning remove the gum, and attach a vessel to receive the exuding milk, and should the juice be required very thin, a little salt may be added to the asaf&oelig;tida.

<p id=p328><ab type=parNum>328</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tendhoo</hi> <UR>tnd-hU</UR>, called also <hi>Tendook</hi>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Diospyros Ebenum</hi>,&rdquo; another kind is called <hi>Bychtendook</hi>. A tree of India, of a large size; its fruit like the <hi>Anula</hi>, but smaller. The first kind cures boils, eruption and disorders of wind. When the tree becomes aged, it produces the ebony, which is the centre; it cures bilious disorders; its unripe fruit is cool, astringent and increases wind. When ripe it is heavy, beneficial in bilious complaints, disorders of the blood, and seminal weakness; The second kind is nearly similar in its properties; but is more cooling, light, and astringent.

<p id=p329><ab type=parNum>329</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tejotee</hi> <UR>tjUtI</UR>.&mdash;Bitter, pungent, hot, stomachic, useful in disorders of mucus, wind, dysuria, cough, and convulsions.

<pb id=pb65 n=65><p id=p330><ab type=parNum>330</ab> <hi rend=sc>Teetur</hi> <UR>tytr</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Partridge</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Perdix Francolinus</hi>.&rdquo; Its flesh increases the color of the skin, renders the bowels costive; is stomachic, useful in hiccup, and disorders of the three principal secretions; beneficial in difficulty of breathing, cough, and dropsy.

<p id=p331><ab type=parNum>331</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tendooa</hi> <UR>tndUA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The <hi>Leopard</hi>, <hi>Felis Leopardus</hi>.&rdquo; Some say the Indian name for this is <hi>Nimonur</hi>. The people of India call it a species of tiger, but it is smaller; it is also named <hi>Tendoo</hi>.

<p id=p332><ab type=parNum>332</ab> <hi rend=sc>Telkirur</hi> <UR>tl kUr</UR> or <hi>Telkúr</hi>.&mdash;The oil of the <hi>Kojora</hi>; it is bitter, pungent, hot, beneficial in affections from wind, strengthens the system, diminishes the eye-sight, increases the three principal secretions, and produces heart-burn.

<p id=p333><ab type=parNum>333</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tesoo</hi> <UR>tshU</UR>.&mdash;The flower of the <hi>Palass</hi>.

<p id=p334><ab type=parNum>334</ab> <hi rend=sc>Tezpat</hi> <UR>tyzpAt</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Patrudje</hi>.

<p id=p335><ab type=parNum>335</ab> <hi rend=sc>Teerun</hi> <UR>tyrn</UR>.&mdash;Cool, bitter, useful in wounds, and improves the complexion.

<p id=p336><ab type=parNum>336</ab> <hi rend=sc>Terbile</hi> <UR>trbylI</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A medicine of India.

<p id=p337><ab type=parNum>337</ab> <hi rend=sc>Teetee</hi> <UR>tytI</UR>.&mdash;The name of the fruit <hi>Karele</hi>.


<div1 id=jeem>
<head><UR>j, ch</UR></head>


<p id=p338><ab type=parNum>338</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jamin</hi> <UR>jAmn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Eugenia Jambolana.</hi>&rdquo; One of the largest of trees; its leaves about 3 inches long and half an inch broad, of an oval shape. The fruit is round and of three kinds, the <hi>Deeriaie</hi>, the <hi>Bhagaie</hi>, and <hi>Sehraie</hi>. Of the <hi>Bhagaie</hi>, there are two kinds, the largest called <hi>Churputtra</hi> and the common <hi>Jamun</hi>. The common name of the <hi>Deeriaie</hi> is <hi>Nadeye</hi>. All kinds are dry and astringent; cures disorders of mucus, bile, blood, and boils and eruptions, but when the fruit is large it is sweet, and difficult of digestion; it cures swellings in the body. Some have called the <hi>Ray Jamun</hi> hot. The <hi>Sehraie</hi> is strengthening, and increases semen. There is a kind of <hi>Jamun</hi> grown in Delhi, that is without stones, and very sweet; in my opinion this is the best of all, and next to it must rank the <hi>Ray Jamun</hi>.

<p>That fruit which is found in the latter end of the rains is called <hi>Bhadeya</hi>, and is also sweet. In my opinion it is cool and moist, and stomachic, but the one without the stone, named <hi>Bèdána</hi>, is more so than the other kinds.

<p>The juice of the fruit is to be preferred as a stomachic, and is more grateful to the taste. It is best prepared by being sprinkled <pb id=pb66 n=66>with salt, and shaken in a dish, which deprives it of its great astringency and corrects its hurtful qualities.

<p>There is a kind of jamun of the color of dry grass, of a yellowish white color, smaller than those described, of a pleasant smell. Nawab Assoph-ul-Dowlah at Lucknow, taking into consideration its scarcity, brought it from the eastward, and sowed it in his gardens. It is the now common <hi>goolaub jamun</hi>, and smells of roses; there is also a kind of jamun at Lucknow called <hi>Phalenda</hi>.

<p id=p339><ab type=parNum>339</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jatie</hi> <UR>jAtI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Chumbelie</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Jasminum Grandiflorum</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p340><ab type=parNum>340</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chaab</hi> <UR>chAb</UR>.&mdash;The fruit of the <hi>Guj peepul</hi>, cures hemorrhoids, and resembles <hi>peepulamool</hi> in its properties.

<p id=p341><ab type=parNum>341</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jaie Puttrie</hi> <UR>jAI p'trI</UR>.&mdash;Hot, light, vermifuge, cures mucous disorders, and is an antidote to poisons. It is a name for Bisbass.

<p id=p342><ab type=parNum>342</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chakussoo</hi> <UR>chAksU</UR>.&mdash;A <hi>Jeshmoridj</hi>. If 21 grains of this be bruized and moistened with filings of Sandal-wood in water, in a new earthern vessel, and drank in the morning, it will be found very <corr sic=effetcual>effectual</corr> in Dysuria ardens.

<p id=p343><ab type=parNum>343</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jaiphill</hi> <UR>jAI p-hl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Nutmeg, <hi>Myristica Aromatica</hi>, <hi>Myristica Moschata</hi>.&rdquo; Hot, light, stomachic, clears the throat, cures mucous disorders, and allays vomiting; is vermifuge, remedies any irregularity in the sense of smelling and cough.

<p id=p344><ab type=parNum>344</ab> <hi rend=sc>Charai</hi> <UR>chArA'yI</UR>, or <hi>Charwolie</hi>; both names of <hi>Cherownjee</hi>.

<p id=p345><ab type=parNum>345</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jaal</hi> <UR>jAl</UR>.&mdash;A kind of fish.

<p id=p346><ab type=parNum>346</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jaiey</hi> <UR>jA'yI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Jasminum Grandiflorum?</hi> A sweet smelling flower, bitter and cool, useful in eruptions of the mouth from heat, in disordered eye sight, and affections of the uterus, also in wounds and ulcers.

<p id=p347><ab type=parNum>347</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chakoth</hi> <UR>chAkU't</UR>.&mdash;A culinary vegetable, sweet and saltish, useful in affections of wind, mucus, bile; fever, and piles. It also remedies costiveness, improves the taste of the mouth, and clears the olfactory nerves.

<p id=p348><ab type=parNum>348</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chalkurie</hi> <UR>chAl krI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Foo</hi> or <hi>Mujeeth</hi>.

<p id=p349><ab type=parNum>349</ab> <hi rend=sc>Changerie</hi> <UR>chAngy'rI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Umulchhangerie</hi>.

<p id=p350><ab type=parNum>350</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheebook</hi> <UR>chybU'k</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Khurnie</hi>.

<p id=p351><ab type=parNum>351</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chitchera</hi> <UR>chychy'rA</UR> or <hi>Chichira</hi>, also <hi>Chirchira</hi>. P. <hi>Khasmar</hi>. <pb id=pb67 n=67>&ldquo;<hi>Achyranthus aspera.</hi>&rdquo; Pungent and laxative, increases appetite, cures disorders of wind and mucus, <hi>daad</hi>, <hi>seulie</hi>, piles, itch, (both dry and moist,) itchiness in the bowels, dropsy, boils, and other eruptions. Another kind is red; both are dry and astringent. The seed is beneficial in those eruptions, the consequence of vitiated bile. The red flowers are very common, the white are more scarce; if the white flower be preserved about the person, it will render one invulnerable. In disorders of the blood, the root bruised in water and taken is useful, mixed with dhaie and sugar, it is of use in Menhorragia cruenta. The stem of the plant used as a tooth-brush is excellent in disorders of the teeth, and sweetens the breath. The juice of its leaves squeezed into the eye improves eye-sight. The seeds and leaves pounded and drank in a seer of milk is a powerful emetic, or if they be taken to the quantity of four tolahs daily for 21 days in congee, they will cure bleeding, piles, and bruised and applied externally, will act as styptics. The white flowers<corr sic=" are" resp=errata></corr> kept on the person, will prevent you from being stung by a scorpion, or will remove the pain when externally applied.

<p id=p352><ab type=parNum>352</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chetuck</hi> <UR>chtk</UR>.&mdash;A name given to birds that inhabit wild places, (those more tame are called <hi>Chiria</hi>,) they are sweet to the taste; cold and moist. Aphrodisiac, and useful in disorders called <hi>Sunpat</hi>, and increase phlegm. Tame fowl is hot and dry, also aphrodisiac.

<p id=p353><ab type=parNum>353</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jutamassie</hi> <UR>j'tAmAshI</UR>.&mdash;Bitter and cold, clears the skin, useful in mucous disorders or diffusion of bile in the blood, in affections of the throat, and is an antidote to poisons. &ldquo;Spikenard, Valeriana <hi>Jatamansi</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p354><ab type=parNum>354</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chuttra</hi> <UR>chtrA</UR>.&mdash;During digestion it is hot, and produces a burning sensation, curative in itch and flatulence.

<p id=p355><ab type=parNum>355</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chuttur Phill</hi> <UR>chtrphl</UR>.&mdash;A name of <hi>Syneed</hi>, a kind of <hi>Khoreacera</hi>.

<p id=p356><ab type=parNum>356</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chichinda</hi> <UR>ch-chndA</UR>, also <hi>Chunchilund</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Beta Vulgaris</hi>.&rdquo; The root of a culinary vegetable of India. It is of a long tapering shape like the carrot, and is in general use. I have experienced it to be of use in dry emaciation, and that it is sweet and stomachic, light and beneficial in superabundance of bile, increases appetite, <pb id=pb68 n=68>and removes viscid mucus and bile. The root is laxative. Another kind is bitter, hot, and moist, decreases bile, mucus and heat, and cures all disorders of the blood.

<p id=p357><ab type=parNum>357</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chachoondur</hi> <UR>chhchhndr</UR>, also called <hi>Chulde</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Sorex Cerulescens</hi>, Shaw.&rdquo; &ldquo;<hi>Sorex Ceruleus</hi>, Turton.&rdquo; <hi>The Musk-rat.</hi> P. <hi>Kormoosh</hi>. If its meat is applied to the ulcer at the back of the neck called Khoonadeer, it will be found very effectual. If its brain be dissolved in oil and applied as a friction to the spots of white leprosy, and other discolorations of the skin, it will remove them. If the scrotum is tied up and preserved about the person as a charm, it will increase and lengthen the continuance of aphrodisia.

<p id=p358><ab type=parNum>358</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chirchirra</hi> <UR>ch'rch'rA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Chitchira</hi>.

<p id=p359><ab type=parNum>359</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chirpoota</hi> <UR>chyrpUtA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, cool and dry, and aperient; cures difficulty of breathing and cough.

<p id=p360><ab type=parNum>360</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chiria</hi> <UR>chryA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Roonjisk</hi>, called also <hi>Chituck</hi>.

<p id=p361><ab type=parNum>361</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chirownjee</hi> <UR>chyrUnjI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The nut of the <hi>Chironjia Sapida</hi>.&rdquo; A round or oval seed like the <hi>peepul</hi>, of a dark-brown colour. The tree is of the milky kind, the leaves white, or of an earthy color, an oil is expressed from its kernel. A. <hi>Hubboossum&apos;na</hi>. P. <hi>Nookul Khaja</hi>. It is sweet and oleaginous, heavy and luxative, beneficial in bilious and mucous disorders, in foulness of the blood, heat of the body, and bruises, and it increases wind.

<p>It is also written that <hi>Chirownjie</hi> is the kernel of the stone of a fruit, of the appearance and taste of the <hi>phalsa</hi>, and that it is dried and carried hence to various countries. It is very common in Bundelcund, it ripens in the commencement of the hot weather, and the capsule is said to be separated from the kernel in a hand-mill. The tree is large: the nuts are strung on thread and used by the natives as necklaces, and they are roasted and eaten as food.

<p id=p362><ab type=parNum>362</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cherayta</hi> <UR>chrA'ytA</UR>, called also <hi>Punsaal</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Gentiana Chirayata</hi>, Roxb. Sp. Ch. Herbaceous, leaves stem-clasping, lanceolate, 3&ndash;5-nerved, corol rotate, four cleft, smooth stamens, four, capsule ovate, bifurcate, as long as the calyx.&rdquo; It is bitter, cool, and dry, light, and producing wind, beneficial in cough, general heat, and fever. A. <hi>Rusbuzzèreera</hi>.

<pb id=pb69 n=69><p id=p363><ab type=parNum>363</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jest</hi> <UR>js't</UR> in P. <hi>Roo Tootia</hi>. It is hot and light, and during digestion cool and heavy; facilitates the fusion of metals.

<p id=p364><ab type=parNum>364</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chesteymud</hi> <UR>chs'tI md</UR>, called also <hi>Chestee</hi>, also <hi>Chitenmud</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Glycyrrhira Glabra</hi>. W. <hi>Glycine Abrus</hi>, Linn.&rdquo; in Arabic <hi>Assóoloos&apos;oos</hi>.

<p id=p365><ab type=parNum>365</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukunder</hi> <UR>chqndr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Saluk</hi>.

<p id=p366><ab type=parNum>366</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chikara</hi> <UR>chkArA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of deer; its tail is black, and its meat sweet, cool, light, and astringent, stomachic, cardiac, and beneficial in disorders of wind, bile, and mucus.

<p id=p367><ab type=parNum>367</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukora</hi> <UR>chkUrA</UR>. In P. <hi>Rubk</hi>. &ldquo;A variety of <hi>Titroo Rufus</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p368><ab type=parNum>368</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukua Chukui</hi> <UR>chkUA chkUI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Anas Casarea.</hi>&rdquo; The <hi>Braminee Duck</hi>. Its flesh is sweet, cool, moist, and heavy, <corr sic=strenghtens>strengthens</corr> the system, restrains the flow of urine and fæces, cures affections of wind, bile, and blood. In P. it is named <hi>Soorkhab</hi> and <hi>Chukawuck</hi>, A. <hi>Kumbéera</hi>.

<p id=p369><ab type=parNum>369</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukeerka</hi> <UR>chkyrkA</UR>.&mdash;The white kind of the seed, called <hi>Soorkh</hi>, a common seed, used as a weight; properties the same.

<p id=p370><ab type=parNum>370</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ch&oelig;kurk</hi> <UR>chkr'k</UR>.&mdash;A name of the grain <hi>Koolthie</hi>.

<p id=p371><ab type=parNum>371</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukond</hi> <UR>chkUnd</UR>.&mdash;A name of the <hi>Penwar</hi> or <hi>Chukwand</hi>.

<p id=p372><ab type=parNum>372</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukotrah</hi> <UR>chkUtrA"h</UR>.&mdash;A fruit of Hindost&apos;han; its tree like the <hi>Rutael</hi>, with double leaves, the under one very small. It is very easily engrafted on the Rutael tree. The fruit is green and round; its capsule granulated; its green color is that of a small melon; inside it is red; the divisions very small. It is sweet, acid, and bitter, and is ate with salt or sugar. It is cool in its properties, allays thirst from bile, creates appetite. In no book of Hindost&apos;han have I been able to find any account of it. &ldquo;<hi>Citrus Decumanus.</hi> The <hi>Pumalo</hi>, <hi>Batabi Neemboo</hi>, <hi>Pumpleuoes</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p373><ab type=parNum>373</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jooqunoo</hi> <UR>jqnU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Lampyris.</hi>&rdquo; The fire fly. P. <hi>Kermukshub Cherag</hi>. A. <hi>Hubahub</hi>. It shines in the night during the rains.

<p id=p374><ab type=parNum>374</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chukadana</hi> <UR>chqdAn"h</UR>.&mdash;The name of a seed of an earthy color; hard, and having a small kernel; it is like the <hi>Hubèbulsa</hi>, but is somewhat larger; the latter besides is pointed at both ends, whereas this is not. The women of Delhi give this in purges for children.

<p id=p375><ab type=parNum>375</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jillpeelbuka</hi> <UR>jlpl bkA</UR>, also called <hi>Jill peepul</hi>, or <hi>Phylphilabi</hi>. It is cool and dry, and astringent; cardiac and aphrodisiac, strengthens the eyes, cures disorders of blood, heat in the chest<corr>,</corr> <pb id=pb70 n=70>boils and inveterate eruptions; another kind of it is red, dry, beneficial in affections of wind, mucus, and is astringent. Its fruit is beneficial in eruption from vitiated bile. Red flowers very common.

<p id=p376><ab type=parNum>376</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chellwuk</hi> <UR>chlU'k</UR>.&mdash;A large tree of India. Its fresh leaves are used as an application to <sic corr=inflammatory>inflamatory</sic> <hi>Daad</hi>, or other watery eruptions, as well as the common <hi>Daad</hi>. This I have found from experience. <hi>Sybr</hi> is first applied to produce some inflammation, and then this application is made use of. A patient of mine was long annoyed with <hi>Daad</hi> in both his shoulders, for the cure of which he had tried many remedies. I recommended this, he took a quantity of the leaves, bruised them, and applied them over the parts, but from the great heat and irritation they produced, he quickly removed them; he then applied the Mooltance earth, to remove the irritation, this so far succeeded, but the part rose in blisters, the water from the blisters being discharged, the complaint was found relieved, when the parts were well, he again applied the leaves, this destroyed the disease, and left the place all black. The skin soon re-assumed its wonted color, and the disease was perfectly cured. From the above circumstance, I am led to conclude, that the application is a very powerful one, and acts as a blister. If they are applied to parts which have been deprived of sensation, it will be equally effectual as <hi>Sutoobria</hi>.

<p id=p377><ab type=parNum>377</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheylchish</hi> <UR>chlchysh</UR>.&mdash;A very hurtful kind of fish, which increases disorders of the three principal secretions.

<p id=p378><ab type=parNum>378</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chillie</hi> <UR>chlI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of culinary greens, from the common vegetable called <hi>cheel</hi>; cool, dry, light, aperient; promotes appetite, increases knowledge, strengthens the system, cures disorders of the spleen, blood, and the three secretions, and is vermifuge. One kind named <hi>Kutf</hi>, also <hi>Buthua</hi>.

<p id=p379><ab type=parNum>379</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jill Benth</hi> <UR>jlbynt"h</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>ratan</hi>.

<p id=p380><ab type=parNum>380</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jill Butees</hi> <UR>jlbtys</UR>.&mdash;Cool, astringent, producing flatulence.

<p id=p381><ab type=parNum>381</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jill Neeb</hi> <UR>jlnyb</UR>.&mdash;A small plant; its branches minute; also its leaves like the <hi>Loonia saag</hi>; it creeps on the ground, and is to be found near rivers. It is very bitter, and from its constant vicinity to water has obtained its name. It is purgative, powerfully so, in the quantity of 6 mashas. In herpetic eruptions and <pb id=pb71 n=71>Lues venerea it is very beneficial, but it can only be given with safety to those who are not in a weak state.

<p id=p382><ab type=parNum>382</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chumgader</hi> <UR>chmgUdr</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Bat</hi>. A. <hi>Khuffash</hi>. Its blood rubbed on the feet is aphrodisiac. Its properties are particularly described in the Yunani works.

<p id=p383><ab type=parNum>383</ab> <hi rend=sc><corr sic=Jamalgotay resp=errata>Jamalgota</corr></hi> <UR>jmlgU'tA</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Datoon</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Croton Tiglium.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p384><ab type=parNum>384</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chumbeley</hi> <UR>chnbylI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Jasminum Grandiflorum.</hi>&rdquo; A white flower, of a strong, sweet smell, one kind is yellow, and named <hi>Soorunjati</hi>: alike in their properties, both are hot and light, useful in head-aches, pains in the eyes, and teeth, in boils, eruptions and foulness of the blood.

<p>A decoction of its leaves in water will cure tooth-ache; the mouth being repeatedly washed with it. The juice of the root taken with milk will remove suppression of urine, and many have made the experiment with success.

<p id=p385><ab type=parNum>385</ab> <hi rend=sc>Champa</hi> <UR>chnpA</UR> or <hi>Chumpuk</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Michelia Champaca.</hi>&rdquo; A flower of India, of a pyramidal shape, its color is a light or whitish yellow, very beautiful, and as such is often quoted as the perfection of color.

<p>In this part of the country, it is very common; it cures difficulty in voiding urine, disorders of mucus, blood, and nausea. It is pungently bitter and cool; useful in injuries of the nose, and in general heat. One kind is called Paak Chumpa, hot and pungent, creates appetite, improves eye-sight, diminishes mucus, and cures bruises. The smell is cardiac and stomachic.

<p id=p386><ab type=parNum>386</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chermbærie</hi> <UR>chrm byrI</UR>.&mdash;An acid fruit of India; beneficial in itchiness of stomach, disorders of mucus and wind, depraved taste, pains of the chest, loss of <corr sic=appetie>appetite</corr>, and worms. Its acid removes the effects of intoxication; it is cool in its properties. The sweet kind is bitter, and a little heating.

<p id=p387><ab type=parNum>387</ab> <hi rend=sc>Junthmook</hi> <UR>jnt mkx"h</UR>.&mdash;In taste it is sweet, and is like the <hi>Saalie</hi>, (a kind of rice;) in its effects, but the best of all kinds of rice is the <hi>Christn daan</hi>, and that which has been sown in a soil manured by ashes, is the lightest and best in curing mucous disorders. The rice produced in the common manner is heavy, useful in disorders of bile and wind, and frequent change of soil, or the plant removed or transplanted to another soil is the best. It is diuretic and generally beneficial.

<pb id=pb72 n=72><p id=p388><ab type=parNum>388</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jungliechuha</hi> <UR>jnglI chUhA</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Runfeer</hi>. Its flesh is useful in cough, difficulty of breathing, foulness of blood; is dry and beneficial in all the three secretions. The meat of the female is to be preferred to that of the male.

<p id=p389><ab type=parNum>389</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chumbuck</hi> <UR>chnbk</UR>.&mdash;Cool and decreases corpulency; is an antidote to poison. A. <hi>Hyzr Mukunatees</hi>.

<p id=p390><ab type=parNum>390</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chundurkanth</hi> <UR>chndrkAnt-h"h</UR>.&mdash;Its taste is sweet and astringent; it is cool and aperient, strengthens the eyes, reduces corpulency, cures boils and eruptions, and is an antidote to poison. A. <hi>Hyzrool Kummur</hi><corr>.</corr>

<p id=p391><ab type=parNum>391</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chundsoor</hi> <UR>chndAsUr</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Haloo</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Lepedium Sativum.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p392><ab type=parNum>392</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chundun</hi> <UR>chndn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Santalum Album</hi>, W. or <hi>Sirium myrtifolium</hi>.&rdquo; P. <hi>Sandal Suffed</hi>. A little bitter; cool, dry, and light; is cardiac and exhilirates the spirits; is tonic; an antidote to poisons; useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood, allays thirst, heat in the chest, clears the complexion. Its real name is Ujelah. Chundun, and Rukut Chundun is the name for red Sandal.

<p id=p393><ab type=parNum>393</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chundunsarba</hi> <UR>chndn sArbA</UR>.&mdash;A name for white <hi>Kalesur</hi>.

<p id=p394><ab type=parNum>394</ab> <hi rend=sc>Junth</hi> <UR>jntx"h</UR>.&mdash;The name of a large tree, like the <hi>peepul</hi>; its leaves like those of the tamarind; it is prickly, and its bark white.

<p id=p395><ab type=parNum>395</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jawansa</hi> <UR>jUnsA</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Khar Shooter</hi>. It is sweet and bitter, cool, light, and aperient, cures bilious disorders and those of the blood. Also vertigo. <hi>Hedysarum Alhagi.</hi>

<p id=p396><ab type=parNum>396</ab> <hi rend=sc>Choke</hi> <UR>chU'k</UR>.&mdash;Bitter, soft, and emetic, useful in foulness of the blood, mucus, poisons, worms, flatulence, itch and Juzam. &ldquo;<hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>&rdquo;

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Choke</hi> is a medicine of India, it is a black juice, very acid, soft, cool, and dry, increasing appetite, promoting digestion, stomachic and astringent, lessens the secretion of bile, and injuries <corr>of </corr>the tendons. Its corrector is sugar; its succedaneum Bejowra, dose &frac12; to 1 direm.&rdquo;

<p id=p397><ab type=parNum>397</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chowlai</hi> <UR>chUlA'yI</UR> or <hi>Chowrai</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Amaranthus Polygamus</hi>.&rdquo; One kind of it called also <hi>gunder</hi>; a kind of culinary greens, used by the people of India; cool and dry, useful in bilious disorders, mucus, and blood, and is diuretic and aperient. It is stomachic, promotes digestion, and cures eruptions from vitiated bile. Another kind of it is named <hi>mursai</hi>; cool, heavy, and aperient; useful <pb id=pb73 n=73>in seminal weakness, and disorders of the three secretions. A. <hi>Bokulæ Yemania</hi>.

<p id=p398><ab type=parNum>398</ab> <hi rend=sc>Juhi</hi> <UR>jUhI</UR>.&mdash;A small white flower, also a yellow kind. In the <hi>Dhunteri</hi>, it is said there are three kinds of it, a white, yellow, and purple. It has a sweet smell, and some have called it a species of jessamine. In Delhi it obtains the name of Jahee Juhi, but these two words are, properly speaking, distinct names for different flowers, and the author of the <hi>Echtyar Casmi</hi> has described them separately. It is cool and beneficial in affections of the eyes, and increases wind and mucus. &ldquo;<hi>Jasminum Auriculatum.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p399><ab type=parNum>399</ab> <hi rend=sc>Juwar</hi> <UR>jUAr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Holcus sorghum.</hi>&rdquo; A. <hi>Zoorra</hi>. A grain; sweet to the taste, cool and producing wind, useful in mucous disorders and bile, and in my opinion is difficult of digestion. It is aphrodisiac, and if eaten to excess, produces flatulent pains in the bowels. One kind is named Mukaiy, and possesses the same properties.

<p id=p400><ab type=parNum>400</ab> <hi rend=sc>Joonk</hi> <UR>jUnk</UR>.&mdash;A name for an Indian plant, about a yard high, more or less; its leaves are small, and its seed about half an inch in length, resembling a leech; sweet, cool, heavy, and useful in gonorrh&oelig;a, cures wind, bile, and phlegm. Its leaves are very mucilaginous, and the children of India play with the pods, sticking them to their bodies like leeches. It grows in the rains, and usually in uncultivated places.

<p id=p401><ab type=parNum>401</ab> <hi rend=sc>Juhan</hi> <UR>jUhAn</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A kind of anise seed, commonly called <hi>Adjwain Kermanie</hi>. I have described its properties under the head <hi>Adjwain</hi>.

<p id=p402><ab type=parNum>402</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jawakhar</hi> <UR>jUk-hAr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Nuttroon</hi>; pungent, hot, and aperient; useful in affections of wind, mucus, dropsy, pains in the bowels, dysuria, and is lithontriptic. In the <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi>, it is written, that it is hot and dry, diuretic and aperient, useful in disorders of mucus, wind, dropsy, pains in the bowels; is lithontriptic, and beneficial in the spleen and indolent tumors.

<p id=p403><ab type=parNum>403</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chouch</hi> <UR>chUch</UR>.&mdash;A large and small kind; pungent and hot; astringent and sweet; inducing costiveness; stomachic; beneficial in cholicks, inflammatory pains in the spleen, and other pains in the bowels. It is a favorite ingredient in many formulæ.

<pb id=pb74 n=74><p id=p404><ab type=parNum>404</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chehtaon</hi> <UR>ch-htA'un</UR>.&mdash;A tree of India; aperient, and useful in disorders of mucus and wind; also in Juzam, boils, and eruptions.

<p id=p405><ab type=parNum>405</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jholputtur</hi> <UR>jUl potr</UR>.&mdash;A kind <hi>Asheer</hi>; cool, light, and cardiac; cures disorders of mucus and bile, and diminishes the volume of blood.

<p id=p406><ab type=parNum>406</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cherakakoli</hi> <UR>chyrAkAklI</UR> or <hi>Chershookla</hi>; also <hi>Chermudera</hi>; sweet, cool, heavy, aphrodisiac, and useful in disorders of blood, bile, heart-burn, dryness of the mouth, thirst, fever, emaciation and dropsy.

<p>In the <hi>Dhunteri</hi>, it is also said to promote digestion, and to be pleasant in flavor, and agreeable in its effects; to cure suppression of urine and pains in the chest. It also is used as a cephalic. It is said to cure affections of mucus, Juzam and worms, and to cause an increase of bile; it is commonly known by the name of <hi>Nuckchickenie</hi>. Vide N.

<p id=p407><ab type=parNum>407</ab> <hi rend=sc>Choonderdhan</hi> <UR>chndrd-hAn</UR> or <hi>Jowdhan</hi>.&mdash;A kind of rice, called also <hi>Rukitsaal</hi>.

<p id=p408><ab type=parNum>408</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cherie</hi> <UR>chyry</UR>.&mdash;The goat; its flesh is moist and heavy, but easy of digestion; useful in disorders of the three secretions; produces no heat at stomach, increases semen, and renders the sense of smelling more acute: it is also called <hi>Bukeri</hi>. A. <hi>Mehyr</hi>.

<p id=p409><ab type=parNum>409</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jeengha</hi> <UR>j-hyngA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of shell-fish; hot and dry; those newly taken are to be preferred; they are aphrodisiac, aperient, and grateful to the taste. This may generally be true, but bad effects have followed their use, and that which is salted is melanagogue, or produces black bile; the corrector is oil of almonds. P. <hi>Muluch Diriae</hi>, A. <hi>Jeradool Bahr</hi>. Some have said that the <hi>Robean</hi> is the same fish.

<p id=p410><ab type=parNum>410</ab> <hi rend=sc>Junkar</hi> <UR>jnkAr</UR>.&mdash;A name for the deer <hi>Barasingha</hi>.

<p id=p411><ab type=parNum>411</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jojakhar</hi> <UR>jUjAk-hAr</UR>.&mdash;A name for nitre.

<p id=p412><ab type=parNum>412</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chohara</hi> <UR>ch-hxArA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The date. <hi>Ph&oelig;nix Dactylifera.</hi>&rdquo; P. called <hi>Khoórma sunshekun</hi>; aphrodisiac; it is ate with milk. If the <hi>Chóhara</hi> is bruised, and with salep and sugar boiled in milk, till nearly half the milk shall be evaporated, then drank, it will be found useful as an aphrodisiac, increasing the bulk of the solids, and if it digests easily, it will be found peculiarly useful. If roasted and eat with opium, it becomes astringent.

<pb id=pb75 n=75><p id=p413><ab type=parNum>413</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chirr</hi> <UR>chr</UR>, and another kind, which is black; both are cold, and useful in disorders of all the secretions, heat of the body, and Juzam. P. <hi>Soombulutteeb</hi>.

<p id=p414><ab type=parNum>414</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chereela</hi> <UR>chrylA</UR>.&mdash;In its properties it resembles <hi>Sèleèchih</hi>, (Cassia Lignea.) P. <hi>Ooshna</hi>.

<p id=p415><ab type=parNum>415</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jhow</hi> <UR>j-hU</UR>.&mdash;A name of <hi>Turfa</hi>. If bruised and mixed with vinegar it suppurates indolent swellings, and also scirrhous swellings of the spleen.

<p id=p416><ab type=parNum>416</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cherkund</hi> <UR>chrknd</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Beedareekund</hi>, which is white.

<p id=p417><ab type=parNum>417</ab> <hi rend=sc>Chundurseha</hi> <UR>chndrsyA"h</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mudukpúrnie</hi>.

<p id=p418><ab type=parNum>418</ab> <hi rend=sc>Choocheroo</hi> <UR>chUchyrU</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Sírphonka</hi>.

<p id=p419><ab type=parNum>419</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jhirberie</hi> <UR>j-hrbyrI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Jujube.</hi>&rdquo; A name for wild <hi>Baer</hi>; is acid, cool, useful in bile, cardiac, and astringent: if dried and pounded, it is called <hi>Búrchun</hi>; this possesses all its properties, but is more astringent.

<p id=p420><ab type=parNum>420</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jyaphupp</hi> <UR>jI p-hUp</UR>.&mdash;Another kind of it is <hi>Tersindiapurni</hi>; its seed is made into beads. It is also called <hi>Surupjea</hi>; it is astringent, strengthens the hair of the head, and darkens its color.

<p id=p421><ab type=parNum>421</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheehuræ</hi> <UR>chyxUryA</UR>.&mdash;A tree of India; there is another kind called <hi>Choobnuz</hi>, and a third kind <hi>Sátoona</hi>. Its wood smells strong and rancid; it is hot and dry in the 3rd degree; it is very oleaginous and greasy. If its juice be expelled by heat and collected, it is excellent as an application in paralysis, and it also cleanses large foul ulcers. Its milk is pungent and heating, and it is an active poison, hot and dry in the 4th degree; applied to the skin, it blisters; it is used in swellings from cold. Its wood is used internally in loss of voluntary motion or insensibility and epilepsy, and it is said to be lithontriptic. It injures the lungs, and its corrector is oil of almonds and gum. The dose is 3 mashas.

<p id=p422><ab type=parNum>422</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jeewuk</hi> <UR>jyU'k</UR>.&mdash;Cool and aphrodisiac; increases semen and mucus; cures disorders of bile, wind, heart-burn, emaciation, and hectic fever.

<p id=p423><ab type=parNum>423</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheenuk</hi> <UR>chynk</UR>.&mdash;A tree of Hindostan; hot; useful in boils and eruptions, affections of the heart and disorders of wind; it is astringent.

<p id=p424><ab type=parNum>424</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jeewuntie</hi> <UR>jyUntI</UR> or <hi>Jeéwúnie</hi> or <hi>Jéwá</hi>; cool, sweet, moist, light; <pb id=pb76 n=76>strengthens the system and eyesight; is astringent; useful in disorders of mucus, wind, and bile. It forms an ingredient in all favorite formulæ, and it removes feverish heat. The people of India use its greens in the beginning of the cold weather as food; the small Jeewuntie being considered as one of the best of culinary vegetables. It is called also <hi>Saag Sherista</hi>. The large kind is named <hi>Bheéndoorie</hi>, from its more limited mode of spreading its branches, and the small kind, for the contrary reason, is called <hi>Béldoórie</hi>: this spreads to a great distance, and creeps along whatever it comes in contact with. The fruit is like the cucumber.

<p>The above is also the name of a flower, which in the <hi>Dhunteri</hi> is said to be aphrodisiac, and to clear the voice.

<p id=p425><ab type=parNum>425</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jeewung</hi> <UR>jyUnk</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Buthua</hi>. Its stem is red.

<p id=p426><ab type=parNum>426</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheedah</hi> <UR>chydA"h</UR>.&mdash;The small pine (Senobir Jegheer); sweet; pungent during digestion; bitter, hot, moist, light; useful in windy disorders, and affections of the eyes, throat, and ear.

<p id=p427><ab type=parNum>427</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheenah</hi> <UR>chnA"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Millet. <hi>Panicum Italicum.</hi> <hi>Pan.</hi> <hi>Pilosum.</hi>&rdquo; P. <hi>Arzum</hi>. A. <hi>Dakhun</hi>. Its properties are nearly the same as the small seed called Kongnee.

<p id=p428><ab type=parNum>428</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheetul</hi> <UR>chytl</UR>.&mdash;An Indian Deer, black and white, pyebald. Its flesh has the same properties as the Chikara.

<p id=p429><ab type=parNum>429</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheetah</hi> <UR>chytA"h</UR>.&mdash;Its meat is hot and heavy; useful in disorders of wind, affections of the eyes and voice. In A. <hi>Phahus</hi>; it is also the name of a medicine mentioned hereafter.

<p id=p430><ab type=parNum>430</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheel</hi> <UR>chyl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The Kite. <hi>Falco Cheela</hi>,&rdquo; Lath. Its meat is heavy, and increases disorders of the three secretions. In P. <hi>Ghúllevaz</hi>. A. <hi>Hydát</hi>.

<p id=p431><ab type=parNum>431</ab> <hi rend=sc>Jeepaul</hi> <UR>jI pAl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Jamalgota</hi>.

<p id=p432><ab type=parNum>432</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheetah</hi> <UR>chytA"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Valerian?</hi> <hi>Plumbago Zeylanica</hi> or <hi>Plumbago Rosea</hi>, W.&rdquo; A medicine; one kind of which is red, the other purple; inside of a yellowish color; both woods are very thin, and both are pungent, bitter, dry, light, astringent, stomachic, and increase the powers of digestion. The red kind, mixed with strong vinegar, and rubbed hard on the spots of white leprosy till blisters arise, will have the effect of removing the complaint. A. <hi>Sheetrudj</hi>.

<p id=p433><ab type=parNum>433</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cheea</hi> <UR>chyA</UR> or <hi>Cheetkeh</hi>, both names for <hi>Hurr</hi>.



<div1 id=khah>
<head><UR>kh</UR></head>


<pb id=pb77 n=77><p id=p434><ab type=parNum>434</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khutchur</hi> <UR>khchxr</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Bagul</hi>. P. <hi>Astur</hi>. The mule. Its flesh increases strength; is aphrodisiac; it likewise increases mucus and bile.

<p id=p435><ab type=parNum>435</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khergosh</hi> <UR>khrgUsh</UR>.&mdash;So called in Persian. The hare. Its Indian name is <hi>Sussáh</hi>. Vide S.

<p id=p436><ab type=parNum>436</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kherboozah</hi> <UR>khrbUz"h</UR>.&mdash;So named, both in Persian and Hinduee. It is hot, dry, light, and sweet; when ripe it increases bile, and is diuretic and lithontriptic. Its corrector is oxymel.

<p id=p437><ab type=parNum>437</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khuss</hi> <UR>khs</UR>, also <hi>Osheère</hi>.&mdash;In the hot weather it is used for cooling houses. It is cool, assists digestion; is astringent, and cures bilious disorders; also those of mucus and blood. It allays thirst, cures blisters and acne, general heat, dysuria, boils and eruptions; prolongs aphrodisia, and I have found it excellent as a cardiac and astringent.


<div1 id=dal>
<head><UR>d</UR></head>


<p id=p438><ab type=parNum>438</ab> <hi rend=sc>Darhuld</hi> <UR>dAr-hld</UR>.&mdash;The wood of a tree called <hi>Huld</hi>. It is pungent and bitter; hot, dry, and useful in disorders of phlegm, bile, and blood, in acne, seminal weakness, swellings of the body, marasmus, boils, eruptions, in affections of the eye, pain in the ear; is lithontriptic, and cicatrizes wounds.

<p>In the <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi>, is the following:

<p><hi>Darhuld</hi> is a wood of a yellow color; if bruised with <hi>Malageer</hi>, mixed with honey, and taken, it will be found excellent in marasmus, and as an external application in the itch.

<p id=p439><ab type=parNum>439</ab> <hi rend=sc>Datoon</hi> <UR>dAtUn</UR> also <hi>Danth</hi> or <hi>Danti</hi>, names for <hi>Hubboos Salateen</hi>. In Hinduee <hi>Jamalgota</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Croton Tiglium</hi>, W. <hi>Jayapála</hi>, S.&rdquo; It is bitter, pungent, and hot; promotes digestion; cures bilious affections, also foulness of the blood, disorders of mucus, swellings of the body, dropsy, and worms. It is violently purgative, and clears off the three secretions, but more especially mucus and black bile. It is not a safe medicine for weakly people, children, or the aged; but it is proper for those of strong constitutions, such as the Highlanders or country people, on whom weaker medicines have little effect. I have seen some of the hill people eat from 5 to 10 of the nuts without producing more than two or three motions, whereas the people of this city (Delhi) find half a nut as much as they can well bear.

<pb id=pb78 n=78><p>The small green substance in the centre or heart of the nut, ought to be thrown aside, as it is poisonous. I have given this medicine very often with great good effect, and it is a general favorite with the physicians of Hindostan. In cholicks attended with vomiting, I have prescribed it with good effect.

<p id=p440><ab type=parNum>440</ab> <hi rend=sc>Daoodie</hi> <UR>dA'udI</UR>.&mdash;A common plant, about half a yard high, on which grows white and yellow flowers; it is hot and dry, and the smell of the flowers removes disorders from cold on the brain by heating it. The powder of the flowers, in the quantity of 6 mashas, with sugar, is lithontriptic, and in the quantity of 3 mashas if it be boiled, and the decoction drank with sugar, it will also be found beneficial. If the flowers are boiled in oil, till the virtue be extracted, the oil will form an excellent external application in all affections arising from cold; a conserve of its flowers strengthens the stomach and the brain, and removes depression of spirits. The juice of the leaves is attenuating and suppurating. &ldquo;Marigold, <hi>Chrysanthemum</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p441><ab type=parNum>441</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dabeh</hi> <UR>dAb"h</UR>.&mdash;A kind of grass; useful in suppression of urine; is lithontriptic; cures disorders of bile, phlegm, and removes pains in the urinary bladder.

<p id=p442><ab type=parNum>442</ab> <hi rend=sc>Darum</hi> <UR>dArm</UR>.&mdash;The pomegranate of the hills. &ldquo;<hi>Punica granatum</hi>, W.&rdquo; It is very acid and astringent; it increases appetite and promotes digestion; is cardiac; decreases bile, removes depression of spirits, and the sweet kind decreases the 3 secretions.

<p>&ldquo;The bark of the root a cure for Tænia. Boil 8oz. in 3lb. of water to a quart. Of this the patient takes a wine-glassful, and repeats it as the faintness will admit.&rdquo;

<p id=p443><ab type=parNum>443</ab> <hi rend=sc>Darmee Saar</hi> <UR>dArmI sAr</UR>.&mdash;The pomegranate seed. It cures disorders of bile. I have found its powder very useful in giving tone to the stomach and removing heated bile; it is also astringent. Mixed with medicines of a laxative nature, it is given in India on account of its tonic effects, and its preventing injury from other medicines.

<p id=p444><ab type=parNum>444</ab> <hi rend=sc>Darma</hi> <UR>dArmA</UR> called also <hi>Soombulkhar</hi>, or rather it is a species of arsenic.

<p id=p445><ab type=parNum>445</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dakh</hi> <UR>dAk-h"h</UR>.&mdash;Cool, heavy, aperient; improves eye-sight; increases aphrodisia; removes fever, thirst, difficulty of breathing, affections <pb id=pb79 n=79>of wind, bile, and blood, jaundice, dysuria, and heat of body. Its corrector is to be found in its acid, which cures mucous disorders and eruptions from vitiated bile, and the same effects will be produced by grapes without seeds. The hill grapes are acid, light, and useful in mucous disorders, but in some degree increase bile. Ungoor. The grape.

<p id=p446><ab type=parNum>446</ab> <hi rend=sc>Daad Murden</hi> <UR>dAdmrdn</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cassia Alata</hi>, W.&rdquo; The expressed juice of the leaves, mixed with salt, used for the cure of ring-worm.

<p id=p447><ab type=parNum>447</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dooparia</hi> <UR>dUpxryA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Pentapetes Phænicia.</hi>&rdquo; The name of a common flower, of a rose color, and white, and flowers at noon. It is light, astringent, and cures disorders of mucus and bile.

<p id=p448><ab type=parNum>448</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dutchina Virna</hi> <UR>dch-hynA Urn</UR>.&mdash;Bitter and heavy in digestion; dry, and increasing wind; cures cough, boils, eruptions, disorders of bile, and affections of the eyes.

<p id=p449><ab type=parNum>449</ab> <hi rend=sc>Durba</hi> <UR>drUA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Doob</hi>, called also <hi>Shittbúra</hi>.

<p id=p450><ab type=parNum>450</ab> <hi rend=sc>Durbhur</hi> <UR>drb-hr</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Lawa</hi>. Vide L.

<p id=p451><ab type=parNum>451</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dusmool</hi> <UR>dsmUl</UR>.&mdash;A mixture of both kinds of <hi>Punjèmoòl</hi>; it increases appetite; cures disorders of bile, mucus, difficulty of breathing, cough; decreases perspiration; removes morbid inclination to sleep, also fever, flatulence, pains in the bowels, and pleuritic affections.

<p id=p452><ab type=parNum>452</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dukdoka</hi> <UR>dkdUkA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Doòdhèe</hi>.

<p id=p453><ab type=parNum>453</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dumna</hi> <UR>dmnA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Murzunjoosh</hi>, called also <hi>Dawna</hi>; its leaves have a finer smell than the flower, and are very numerous. It is an antidote to poisons; useful in disorders of the blood and the three secretions, Juzam, nausea, and watery itch. Its properties are hot, and it is hurtful to those of the like temperament. Its smell causes dryness of the brain. The wild <hi>Dawna</hi> is the most powerful.

<p id=p454><ab type=parNum>454</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dundundana</hi> <UR>dndndAn"h</UR>.&mdash;A shrub about a yard high; its leaves like those of the <hi>Baer</hi>. It is a trefoil, and in the centre of the three leaves there is a capsule, which when ripe breaks and discharges the seed; it is of a whitish brown color, some more white than others; its seed resembles those of the safflower, but is longer and more broad. It is used as an ingredient in the first medicine given to a child at its birth to clear its bowels.

<pb id=pb80 n=80><p id=p455><ab type=parNum>455</ab> <hi rend=sc>Doon</hi> <UR>dUn</UR> also <hi>Shittbára</hi>.&mdash;The latter is white and cool; cures acne, disorders of mucus, bile, blood, thirst, and general heat. &ldquo;<hi>Poa Cynosuroides.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p456><ab type=parNum>456</ab> <hi rend=sc>Doodhee</hi> <UR>dUd-hI</UR> called also <hi>Dukdòka</hi>.&mdash;A grass of two kinds. The first kind does not rise from the ground; its leaves green; its fibres very small. The leaves like the <hi>Til</hi>. If the branch is broken, a white juice exudes like milk; from this it has derived its name; it grows about a span in diameter. The second kind has red branches, and is much about the size of the other; the first is the hottest and best. It is dry, heavy, and aphrodisiac; cures affections of wind and mucus, also Juzam and worms. It is flatulent; and a third kind of it called <hi>Mydha Seèngie</hi>; also a fourth <hi>Jhènawurha</hi>.

<p>From the <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi>.

<p><hi>Doodhee</hi> is of three kinds: The first large, called <hi>Meendha doodee</hi>; its tree like the <hi>Bael</hi>; its fruit like the <hi>Aak</hi>, and like it too, there is a cottony substance contained in it. Its flowers are white, and milk exudes from its broken branches. If the cottony substance be applied to the piles, and the patient seated over a hot place, that the cotton become well heated, it will cure the complaint. Its leaves are like the <hi>Paan</hi>. The second kind is very small, and remains spread on the ground; its branches are red, and its leaves thin; it is beneficial in gonorrh&oelig;a and in ulcers of the urethra. If it is bruised and eaten for a year, in the quantity that can be held in the palm of the hand, it will be aphrodisiac, increase the secretion of semen, make the hair black, and preserve the eyesight. The 3rd kind grows to the height of 7 or 8 inches, and is useful in seminal weakness and diabetes. If 9 mashas be taken with sugar, it will be useful in remedying a too hurried seminal evacuation and heartburns. The second kind is cool and dry. &ldquo;<hi>Euphorbia hirta.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p457><ab type=parNum>457</ab> <hi rend=sc>Doodee</hi> <UR>dUdI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Hubb-ul-neel</hi>. A purgative seed, beneficial in affections of bile, mucus, piles, worms in the belly and rectum, in badgola, and is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p458><ab type=parNum>458</ab> <hi rend=sc>Doódputeya</hi> <UR>dUdptyA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Chirkakolie</hi>, another kind of which is called <hi>Kakolie</hi>.

<pb id=pb81 n=81><p id=p459><ab type=parNum>459</ab> <hi rend=sc>Doodka</hi> <UR>dUdkA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Doorie</hi>; cures superabundance of wind, mucus, phlegm, piles, worms, Badgola, and is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p460><ab type=parNum>460</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhamin</hi> or <hi rend=sc>Dhunoon</hi> <UR>d-hnUn d-hAmn</UR>.&mdash;A prickly tree, astringent and light, and useful in disorders of phlegm, bile, blood, and in cough.

<p id=p461><ab type=parNum>461</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhunjawasa</hi> <UR>d-hn jUAsA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Jáwássá</hi>; its properties the same.

<p id=p462><ab type=parNum>462</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhadahwun</hi> <UR>d-hAd-hAUn</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree, useful in disorders of phlegm, wind, poisons, Juzam, piles, and <hi>Sunpat</hi>. <hi>Sunpat</hi> is a disease consisting of loss of sensation and universal chilliness and numbness.

<p id=p463><ab type=parNum>463</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhaw</hi> <UR>d-hAU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Grislea Tomentosa</hi>, Roxb. <hi>Lythrum Fructicosum</hi>, Linn.&rdquo; A prickly shrub, cool and useful in bilious disorders, mucus, piles, marasmus, &amp;c.

<p id=p464><ab type=parNum>464</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhawa</hi> <UR>d-hAUA</UR>.&mdash;A tree, the flowers of which are generally known; it is also called <hi>Dhatki</hi>, bitter, pungent, astringent, cool, light, and curing laxities of the bowels; useful in disorders of bile and blood, and is an antidote to poison; is vermifuge, beneficial in acne, and is a little intoxicating; it is also recommended in prolapsus ani, menorrhagia, and hæmorrhoides; it is said to be equal in its properties.

<p id=p465><ab type=parNum>465</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhatura</hi> <UR>d-htUrA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Datura Metel.</hi> W. <hi>Datura Stramonium</hi>.&rdquo; A plant about a yard high, more or less. It has numerous branches, like the <hi>Benghen</hi> plant; it grows wild, and is also cultivated; its leaves are like those of the <hi>Abassie</hi>; its seed vessel like the walnut, or rather larger; it has small prickles on its surface, and is filled with seeds. There are several kinds of it. One has a black flower, and also a blackish seed vessel: another is white; the first is seldom met with, and is the strongest of any; the flower is of the shape of the <hi>Toorhee</hi>, (a wind instrument, a trumpet.) It is hot, heavy, and promotes appetite, but produces vomiting; useful in disorders of phlegm, poison, itch, worms, and nausea; clears the complexion, cures fevers, Juzam, boils, and eruptions, as also many other disorders. It is a very active poison; its corrector is cotton, leaf for leaf, seed for seed, flower for flower; its nut is to be chosen in preference for medical <pb id=pb82 n=82>use. If the root of the black <hi>Dhatura</hi> be kept in the house, it will be productive of both good luck and a good name; if it be dried in the shade, and taken in conjee to the quantity of 9 mashas, all white hair will fall from the head and black hair grow in its place. If the root be dried and pounded to the quantity of 160 direms, and mixed with 80 direms of cow&apos;s ghee, and placing it on the fire in a new vessel, form it into the consistence of sweetmeats, then tying up the mouth of the vessel close, place it for 40 days among paddy, at the expiration of which time, let the person bathe and give alms to the poor; and let him take out the preparation, and eat as much as he can take up between two fingers, daily for 40 days, fasting; and nothing used as food except rice and milk, abstaining from all acids; lost strength will be restored, youth renovated, the hair never will become white, and it will prove aphrodisiac.

<p>If the black <hi>Dhatura</hi> be bruised and mixed with goat&apos;s milk and sugar, and boiled, it will cure barrenness in women.

<p>If the flowers of the black <hi>Dhatura</hi> be bruised, mixed with honey or cow&apos;s ghee, and a little of your own blood added, and this used as a <hi>Tilak</hi>, or ornament on the forehead betwixt the eyes, whoever sees it will become your slave, be it man or woman. If a woman so uses it, her husband will never forsake her!!

<p id=p466><ab type=parNum>466</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhunia</hi> <UR>d-hnyA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Coriandrum Sativum</hi>, W. <hi>Dhanyaca</hi>, S.&rdquo; Astringent, during digestion sweet, cool, dry, and moist in an equal degree; light, diuretic, carminative, and cardiac; increases appetite, cures disorders of wind, bile, phlegm, and blood. It is vermifuge, and useful in difficulty of breathing, cough, thirst, and piles; it lessens the seminal secretion.

<p id=p467><ab type=parNum>467</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhak</hi> <UR>d-hA'k</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Palass</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Butea Frondosa</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p468><ab type=parNum>468</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dholkudum</hi> <UR>d-hUl kdm</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Cudum</hi>.

<p id=p469><ab type=parNum>469</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhumaha</hi> <UR>d-hmAhA</UR>.&mdash;A creeping plant, growing near the water, covered with thorns like the <hi>Jawassa</hi>, extending even to its flowers. It is small and green before it flowers, like the nightshade. In the <hi>Dhuntori</hi>, it is said to be pungent and astringent, useful in vertigo, chronic fever, and disorders from poison. In dropsy, vomiting, seminal weakness, and delirium, it is beneficial. <pb id=pb83 n=83>I have given it with those medicines which clear the blood, and I have found its effects to be like the <hi>Jawassa</hi>, some indeed call it a variety of this. It is said to be hot and dry in the 2nd degree, others have called it equal. Heated, bruised, and applied to indolent tumours, it will be of use.

<p id=p470><ab type=parNum>470</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhaie.</hi> <UR>d-hAI</UR>.&mdash;Increases the three secretions; it is called by the physicians of India hot and moist, that of the cow is the best. It is astringent in its effects, restrains hemorrhage from piles, and the following R. is known by experience to be excellent.

<p>Take &frac12; a pow (4 ounces) of dhaié, 4&frac12; mashas of moist rice, fried in the husk (Lahie), 2 mashas of dried ginger; stir the dhaie well till it becomes thin, add a little water, and then add to it the fried rice, bruise and pound the ginger, and sprinkle it in. This must be ate daily for a week, when it will so effectually stop the bleeding from piles, that it will not return.

<p id=p471><ab type=parNum>471</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhanqie</hi> <UR>d-hAnkI</UR> or <hi>Dhaoie</hi>; cool and of a bitter taste; light, allays thirst, is astringent, vermifuge, and antidote to poisons.

<p id=p472><ab type=parNum>472</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhawnie</hi> <UR>d-hA'unI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Perishtpirnee</hi>.

<p id=p473><ab type=parNum>473</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dheerukmola</hi> <UR>d-hyr'k mUlA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Saalpurnie</hi>, deriving its name from the large size of its root.

<p id=p474><ab type=parNum>474</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dhendus</hi> <UR>d-hnds</UR>.&mdash;It resembles the <hi>Quince</hi>, with a green rind; the people of India eat it, dressed with and without meat; it is preferable to the <hi>cuddoo</hi>; cool, beneficial in bilious disorders, and quick of digestion.

<p id=p475><ab type=parNum>475</ab> <hi rend=sc>Deodar</hi> <UR>dyUdAr</UR> called also <hi>Déodarie</hi>. The name of a tree; the wood of which bears the same name; it is resinous; hot and beneficial in wind, phlegm, costiveness, piles, and fever. &ldquo;The Fir tree.&rdquo;

<p id=p476><ab type=parNum>476</ab> <hi rend=sc>Deomun</hi> <UR>dyUmn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mahumeed</hi>.



<div1 id=reh>
<head><UR>r</UR></head>


<p id=p477><ab type=parNum>477</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raab</hi> <UR>rAb</UR>.&mdash;Treacle; it is heavy; strengthens the system; is diuretic; increases perspiration, and the three secretions.

<p id=p478><ab type=parNum>478</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raje Umber</hi> <UR>rAj Anbr</UR>.&mdash;A fruit of India; sweet, cool, astringent, and useful in disorders of mucus and bile.

<p id=p479><ab type=parNum>479</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rassun.</hi> <UR>rAsn</UR>.&mdash;Commonly called <hi>Raisun</hi> or <hi>Rowasun</hi>; a tree about the size of a <hi>Baer</hi> tree, or larger; it is a weak biennial plant, but grows rapidly when transplanted. Its leaves grow on both sides of a centre stem, like the Tamarind, and it is rather longer: the tree grows straight from the root. The <pb id=pb84 n=84>author of the <hi>Topha</hi> has described it as a root, and says that the people of India call different medicines by the former names, but they are both the same, and it is the common kind that I have described. Its pod is like the <hi>Lobeia</hi> (bean.) The flower is outside yellow and inside red, with a tinge of yellow. Its leaves contract in the night and unfold in the morning. Some have called it sweet and cool, and have described many varieties of it, white, yellow, red, and grey; but I fancy the difference is merely confined to the color of the flowers; some have said that it diminishes strength. Its flowers are peculiarly beautiful. If its leaves are bruised and applied moist to swellings, it either resolves the tumour or hastens suppuration; it is bitter and heavy, cures disorders of wind and mucus, swellings of the body, difficulty of breathing, eruptions from suffusion of bile, itchiness in the stomach, dropsy, and increases the powers of digestion.

<p id=p480><ab type=parNum>480</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rajejakha</hi> <UR>rAj jk-hA</UR>. A medicine of India; astringent to the taste; dry, heavy, and astringent in its effects; increases wind and f&oelig;cal evacuation; decreases appetite, and adds to the secretion of milk.

<p id=p481><ab type=parNum>481</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rajehuns</hi> <UR>rAj hns</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Purseáwashan</hi>.

<p id=p482><ab type=parNum>482</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rai</hi> <UR>rA'yI</UR>.&mdash;<corr>&ldquo;</corr><hi>Sinapis Ramosa</hi>, Roxb. sp. ch. Annual, erect, ramous siliques expanding, linear, vertically compressed, smooth; leaves petioled, lower lyred; superior, sublanceolate, (Roxb. MS.) Murray II. 398, Woodville III. 409.&rdquo; Cool, bitter, hot, and dry; beneficial in mucous disorders, itch, and Juzam; is vermifuge, stomachic, and increases diffusion of bile. A. <hi>Khirdul</hi>.

<p id=p483><ab type=parNum>483</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raang</hi> <UR>rAng</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Stannum</hi>, <hi>Tagarum</hi>, Tam. Hot, dry, light, and soft; strengthens the eyes; is vermifuge; useful in marasmus, difficulty of breathing, and a deficiency of bile. A. <hi>Rusas</hi>.

<p>In the <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi>, it is thus described: <hi>Raang</hi> is called in P. <hi>Kaley</hi>; cool in the 2nd degree, and moist in the 1st degree. Calcined, it is slightly cool and dry. If a piece of this <hi>Kaley</hi> be put into a pot with meat, you may boil it as long as you please, but the meat will not be properly boiled. The <hi>Kaley</hi> for internal use is calcined, the dose from one to two soorkh.

<p><sic>483</sic> <hi rend=sc>Raal</hi> <UR>rAl</UR>.&mdash;Bitter and astringent; cool, heavy, and inducing costiveness, cures Deojur, acne, boils, eruptions, fever, and cracks <pb id=pb85 n=85>in the thickened cuticle of the feet; and it lessens perspiration. A. <hi>Kaar</hi>, also <hi>Kikahur</hi>. It is said also, that if put into a pipe with tobacco, and one whiff taken the 1st day, two the second, three the third, and so on, it will be found very useful in ulceration of the lungs. <hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p id=p484><ab type=parNum>484</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ramputtrie</hi> <UR>rAm ptrI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>&rdquo; An Indian flower which I have not seen, but which I understand to be like the rose; its properties are, that if it is well rubbed with mercury, it will kill it, and both united form a black mass. More of <corr sic="it sproperties">its properties</corr> I know not.

<p id=p485><ab type=parNum>485</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rajeneemboophile</hi> <UR>rAj nyUp-hl</UR>.&mdash;The sweet lime; it is heavy, and useful in bilious disorders and wind. In my opinion it is a cool cardiac, and decreases heat and thirst.

<p id=p486><ab type=parNum>486</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raibele</hi> <UR>rAI byl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Bael</hi>. The wild kind is called, <hi>Kynd</hi>.

<p id=p487><ab type=parNum>487</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rashna</hi> <UR>rAsnA</UR>.&mdash;Bitter and slow of digestion; cures cough, wind, disorders of blood, and is an antidote to poison, dropsy, and mucus, and it promotes digestion. Its leaves, root, and branches are used in medicine.

<p id=p488><ab type=parNum>488</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rajdooree</hi> <UR>rAI dUrI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Jewuntee</hi>.

<p id=p489><ab type=parNum>489</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raje Ummur</hi> <UR>rAj Amr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Umbarie Burrur</hi>. It is cool, sweet, and astringent, cures some affections of the mouth and phlegm.

<p id=p490><ab type=parNum>490</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rasie</hi> <UR>rAsI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Rudd</hi>.

<p id=p491><ab type=parNum>491</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ruttunjooth</hi> <UR>rtn jUt"h</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A medicine of India. Its leaves are green, and its branches red and yellow; if its branches be bruised in sweet oil, and applied to the head, it will cure <hi>Tinea Capitis</hi>. Its name is also <hi>Abookhoolsa</hi>. P. <hi>Cheojoora</hi>. It is a native of the hills; it is also said to relieve weakness of sight by causing a copious flow of tears, when externally applied.

<p id=p492><ab type=parNum>492</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rattaloo</hi> <UR>rtAlU</UR> also <hi>Runtaloo</hi>. A culinary root, common in India; sweet and pleasant to the taste, cool and slow of digestion; removes oppression on the spirits, bile, and general heat. It increases semen, strengthens the system, and adds to the bulk of the solids. &ldquo;<hi>Dioscorea.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p493><ab type=parNum>493</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ruttun</hi> <UR>rtn</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A name of <hi>Jáwáher</hi>. <hi>Ruttun</hi> (the word) used by itself means <hi>Almass</hi>; but all compounds obtain the name of <hi>Jawàher</hi>; it possesses all the six properties.

<pb id=pb86 n=86><p id=p494><ab type=parNum>494</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rudd</hi> <UR>rd</UR>.&mdash;A name of <hi>Rassie</hi>. It is cool and heavy; strengthens the body; removes disorders of wind and mucus, increases semen, and during digestion is pungent and sweet.

<p id=p495><ab type=parNum>495</ab> <hi rend=sc>Roodwunti</hi> <UR>rUdUntI</UR>.&mdash;A plant very generally useful.

<p>When the <hi>Pookhnichittur</hi> shall happen on a Sunday, take the root, leaves, flowers, and branches, taking care that your shadow does not reach them; leave them five nights in the dew, and then dry them in the shade. Four mashas ate with sugar and honey daily, will be found aphrodisiac. If it be washed for 21 days in the juice of the <hi>plantain</hi> tree, then bruised and washed in the juice of <corr sic=he>the</corr> <hi>Moondie</hi>, sugar taken and boiled in the juice of the plantain tree, and a little of the <hi>Roodwunti</hi> added to it, then adding cloves and cardamoms one tolah each, musk and camphor each 1/2 tolah, and the whole made up into balls of a tolah each, and one eaten daily in boiled milk, it will be found aphrodisiac. If it is taken simply, mixed with sugar, it will have an aphrodisiac property.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Another account.</hi>

<p>Of the <hi>Roodwunti</hi> there are four kinds, black, white, red, and yellow, male and female; the female is distinguished by some of its leaves dropping water. It grows in a moist or watery soil, near Gwallior; it is green, and its leaves and branches resemble gram. The leaves of the male kind are said to transmute metals, and are considered very valuable on that account. If one part of this, half a part of <hi>Tirphilla</hi>, one-fourth part of <hi>Tircoota</hi>, and the bulk of the whole of sugar be bruised and sifted, and as much ate with cow&apos;s milk, as may be held in the palm of the hand, it will cure all disorders to which the human frame is subject, and transmute old age into youth. <hi>Maadentezerrubad</hi><corr>.</corr>

<p>If the leaves are rubbed on silver, and that put into the fire, it will become yellow; if the leaves are thrown into melted tin, it will assume the appearance of gold. If mercury be put into the juice of its leaves and well stirred about, then boiled in milk or vinegar, it will become yellow. If the green leaves be dried, pounded, and taken to the quantity of 9 masha for 14 days, the hair will never become white. If one direm of this and 14 direms of honey, with 10 direms of cow&apos;s ghee, be well stirred up together and taken every morning, the body will become strengthened, <pb id=pb87 n=87>and the hair remain black. Two direms ate with sugar, will increase appetite, and cure seminal weakness and pains in the bowels. If its leaves are used as a cephalic, it will remove the effects of poisons. Some call it <hi>Roowunti</hi>; it is hot and dry.

<p id=p495a><ab type=parNum>495<corr>&prime;</corr></ab> <hi rend=sc>Roodraz</hi> <UR>rUdrAj</UR>.&mdash;Commonly used in India for making beads which are much esteemed. It is bitter, pungent, hot, and vermifuge; rectifies an overflow of blood or a suffusion of bile in the blood; cures mucous affections and head-aches. Is useful in disorders of children, and is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p496><ab type=parNum>496</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ruswut</hi> <UR>rsUt</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;An extract from the root of the <hi>Amomum Anthorhizum</hi>, Roxb.&rdquo; Bitter and pungent; hot; beneficial in mucous disorders, affections of the mouth, eyes, boils, and eruptions. In A. <hi>Huzzood</hi>. &ldquo;Mixed with equal parts of alum and opium, rubbed up together with a little water, it is perhaps the best application in ophthalmia ever used, applied all round the eye.&rdquo; <hi>Trans.</hi>

<p id=p497><ab type=parNum>497</ab> <hi rend=sc>Russ</hi> <UR>rs</UR>.&mdash;In P. called <hi>Sheera</hi>. When written singly, it means the juice of the sugar-cane. It is moist, aperient, and promotes digestion, and removes flatulence.

<p id=p498><ab type=parNum>498</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rusunjeen</hi> <UR>rsn jyn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Ruswut</hi>.

<p id=p499><ab type=parNum>499</ab> <hi rend=sc>Russ Kapoor</hi> <UR>rs kpUr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;An oximuriate of mercury.&rdquo; A medicine of India, resembling the Sumbulkhar; hot and dry in the 3rd degree. It is a poison, but is very useful in Lues Venerea; it affects the gums, loosens the teeth, and debilitates the stomach. Its corrector is milk and butter; its succedan is <hi>Darshékina</hi>: the dose one <hi>soorkh</hi>.

<p id=p500><ab type=parNum>500</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rekhbuk</hi> <UR>rkbk</UR> or <hi>Rekhbukh</hi>, or <hi>Rekhba</hi>. The title given to any medicine that promotes digestion. It is cool, strengthens the system, increases semen and mucus, cures disorders of bile and blood, heat at stomach, emaciation, wind, and hectic fever; it increases mucus.

<p id=p501><ab type=parNum>501</ab> <hi rend=sc>Recktaal</hi> <UR>ryktAl</UR> or <hi>Rukitkund</hi>, a kind of <hi>Péndaloo</hi>.

<p id=p502><ab type=parNum>502</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ruckitchunden</hi> <UR>rkt chndn</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr><hi>Pterocarpus Santalinus</hi>, W.

<p><hi>Racta Chundana</hi>, San. A name for real Sanders wood. Sweet, bitter, cool, heavy; it strengthens eye-sight, induces costiveness; creates nausea, cures thirst, disorders of the blood, bile, fevers, and boils or other eruptions.

<pb id=pb88 n=88><p id=p503><ab type=parNum>503</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rukitsal</hi> <UR>rkt sAl</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr>Red rice. A kind of <hi>Santi</hi>; it is light and is very beneficial; increases strength, clears the complexion, removes disorders of the three secretions; is diuretic, clears the voice, increases semen and wind, and removes general heat.

<p id=p504><ab type=parNum>504</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rukitphoop</hi> <UR>rkt p-hUp</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr>A variety of the <hi>Kanaér</hi>; some say it is a kind of the <hi>Biscopra</hi>; it is called by both names.

<p id=p505><ab type=parNum>505</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rungni</hi> <UR>rngnI</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr>Pungent and hot; destroys appetite; cures cough, asthma, mucus, and fever from mucus and wind. The white <hi>Rungni</hi> is pungent and hot; increases eye-sight; consolidates (amalgamates) mercury; promotes appetite, loosens phlegm and wind.

<p id=p506><ab type=parNum>506</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rungtirra</hi> <UR>rngtyrA</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr>Called also <hi>Sungtirra</hi>. It derives its name from the Emperor <hi>Allam Gheer</hi> the 2nd, because he used it as a medicine; and because no name of a stone can ever be mentioned in the presence of the Emperor, instead of <hi>Sungtirra</hi> it was therefore called <hi>Rungtirra</hi>.

<p id=p507><ab type=parNum>507</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rawasun</hi> <UR>rAUAsn</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr>A name of <hi>Rasun</hi>.

<p id=p508><ab type=parNum>508</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rohoo</hi> <UR>rUhU</UR>.<corr sic=" ">&mdash;</corr>A name for <hi>Shobooth</hi>. It is slightly astringent, and in a small degree increases bile; also gives general strength. I have found it beneficial as an aphrodisiac in strengthening the system and increasing semen; but I have observed that if it does not digest easily it weakens the stomach and produces much mucus; its corrector is ginger, honey, or other medicines of a hot and dry quality.

<p id=p509><ab type=parNum>509</ab> <hi rend=sc>Roohus</hi> <corr sic="<URA>rUhsn</URA>" resp=errata><UR>rUhs</UR></corr>.<corr sic=" ">&mdash;</corr>Vide <hi>Kundhul</hi>.

<p id=p510><ab type=parNum>510</ab> <hi rend=sc>Roopa</hi> <UR>rUpA</UR><corr sic=" ">.&mdash;</corr>Called also <hi>Roopuk</hi>. (Silver.) Astringent, moist, cool, aperient, cardiac, and stomachic. It augments the strength of youth, and preserves meat from becoming putrid; decreases fat, strengthens the brain and bones, and thickens semen, decreases corpulency, and cures disorders of wind and bile. It forms an ingredient in all famous recipes. Its calx is called <hi>Roopruss</hi>, and it is more powerful than any other. <hi>Ranga</hi> resembled it in its properties, also <hi>Gold</hi>.

<p id=p511><ab type=parNum>511</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rooi</hi> <UR>rUI</UR>.&mdash;When very old, if stuffed into the nose, it promotes the discharge of every thing offensive from the brain. It also cures disorders in the head, the consequence of indigestion, as also hemicrania. A. <hi>Kotun</hi> (Cotton.)

<pb id=pb89 n=89><p id=p512><ab type=parNum>512</ab> <hi rend=sc>Romus</hi> <UR>rUms</UR> or <hi>Mudwal</hi>. A name of <hi>Bindaloo</hi>.

<p id=p513><ab type=parNum>513</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rohni</hi> <UR>rUhnI</UR>.&mdash;Of two kinds, both astringent and cool; beneficial in worms in the stomach, and affections of the throat, which it also clears.

<p id=p514><ab type=parNum>514</ab> <hi rend=sc>Roheera</hi> <UR>rUhyrA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India; laxative; useful in wind, Badgola, affections of the liver and spleen, and in dropsy.

<p id=p515><ab type=parNum>515</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rahusphill</hi> <corr sic="<URA>rAhs p-hylI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>rAhs p-hl</UR></corr>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Mowa</hi>.

<p id=p516><ab type=parNum>516</ab> <hi rend=sc>Reewudj</hi> <UR>ryUj</UR>.&mdash;The name of a shrub, cool and useful in suppression of urine, general heat, disorders of the three secretions, and blood; its tree is astringent and hot; cures disorders of the mouth, and is an antidote to poisons; it is vermifuge, cures itches, boils, and wounds, and disorders of the blood and mucus. It prevents the effects of evil-eyes, or demoniacal possession.

<p id=p517><ab type=parNum>517</ab> <hi rend=sc>Reech</hi> <UR>rych</UR>.&mdash;The Bear. Its taste is sweet, cool, and heavy; it is aphrodisiac, and removes affections from wind. P. <hi>Khirs</hi>.

<p id=p518><ab type=parNum>518</ab> <hi rend=sc>Reenga</hi> <UR>ryngA</UR>.&mdash;The fruit of the <hi>Sumhaloo</hi>; produces appetite, clears the uterus after parturition; increases knowledge and bile.

<p id=p519><ab type=parNum>519</ab> <hi rend=sc>Reetha</hi> <UR>rytxA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Sapindus Saponaria.</hi> The soap-nut, soap-wort.&rdquo; Hot, and useful in disorders of the three secretions, and in blood. This however does not coincide with the result of my experience, but I have found it useful in cases of hemicrania, as a cephalic used in the opposite nostril: prevents demoniacal possession. A. <hi>Bunduck Hindui</hi>.

<p id=p520><ab type=parNum>520</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rewind</hi> <UR>ryUnd</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Rheum Palmatum.</hi> Rhubarb.&rdquo; Laxative, stomachic, and astringent; and if taken after meals with rose water, it promotes digestion and strengthens the bowels. It removes mucus from the pylorus.



<div1 id=zain>
<head><UR>z</UR></head>


<p id=p521><ab type=parNum>521</ab> <hi rend=sc>Zeera</hi> <UR>zyrA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cuminum Cyminum</hi>, W. <hi>Jiraca</hi>, S. Cumin seed.&rdquo; Hot and dry; light, stomachic, astringent; increases knowledge, clears the uterus; and of use in disorders of that viscus; it relieves flatulence, Badgola, and vomiting.

<p id=p522><ab type=parNum>522</ab> <hi rend=sc>Zeerki</hi> <UR>zyrkI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Zuerishk</hi>.

<p id=p523><ab type=parNum>523</ab> <hi rend=sc>Zachmeheath</hi> <corr sic="<URA>zych"hmyxtI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>zkhmyxyAt</UR></corr>.&mdash;A small shrub, growing close on the ground, covering it with its foliage; it is found by the side of fields of water; it is of two kinds, the leaf of one small and thin, those of the other broad and thick. The first kind is excellent in the cure of piles: thus, dried in the shade, pounded, sifted, and <pb id=pb90 n=90>taken every morning in the quantity of a palmful with water, for fourteen days; and every night at bed-time, taking 12 mashas of Kúnd Sia, and during its use abstaining from all acids, or other things, which may produce wind.

<p id=p524><ab type=parNum>524</ab> <hi rend=sc>Zerki</hi> <UR>zrkI</UR>.&mdash;A name of pepper, called also <hi>Kála Dana</hi>.

<p id=p525><ab type=parNum>525</ab> <hi rend=sc>Zumiekund</hi> <UR>zmyqnd</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Soorún</hi>.



<div1 id=seen>
<head><UR>s</UR></head>


<p id=p526><ab type=parNum>526</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sanbir</hi> <UR>sAnbyr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Sembile</hi>.

<p id=p527><ab type=parNum>527</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saarba</hi> <UR>sArbA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, of two kinds, both sweet, moist, and heavy; produces semen, and is aphrodisiac; cures disorders of wind, bile, mucus, menorrhagia, and colliquative diarrh&oelig;a in fever.

<p id=p528><ab type=parNum>528</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saramill</hi> <corr sic="<URA>s-sdAArA</URA>" resp=errata><UR>sArAml</UR></corr> or <hi>Sarumluk</hi>, or <hi>Saral</hi>.&mdash;The author of the <hi>Dara Shekoi</hi> has described this as a medicine of India, and in other works that I have consulted, it is called <hi>Sangterra</hi>. In taste it is astringent, and heavy; beneficial in disorders of wind; and increases mucus and bile.

<p id=p529><ab type=parNum>529</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saluk</hi> <UR>sAlU'k</UR> or <hi>Salook</hi>.&mdash;A flower, q. vide.

<p id=p530><ab type=parNum>530</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sagown</hi> <UR>sAgUn</UR> or <hi>Saag</hi>.&mdash;A tree of the hills of Hindostan: the upper surface of the leaves is hard and raised like a file. Some say that this is the <hi>Pheelgosh</hi> (Elephant&apos;s ear), from its resemblance to the ear of the Elephant; it is cool, and useful in disorders of wind and blood. &ldquo;<hi>Tectona grandis.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p531><ab type=parNum>531</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saalpernie</hi> <UR>sAlprnI</UR> or <hi>Saloom</hi>.&mdash;A medicine of India; heavy, cures fever, difficulty of breathing, and disorders of wind, bile, and mucus; it produces nausea, restrains diarrh&oelig;a, beneficial in dryness of the seven <hi>dhats</hi>, strengthens the system, is aphrodisiac, and forms an ingredient in all the favorite formulæ. In the Dhunterri it is written, that in its taste it is pungent; having small and green leaves, the seed-vessel about an inch long, seed small and numerous; curing chronic fevers, seminal weakness, and swelling of the body. It is said to be hot. &ldquo;<hi>Hedysarum Gangeticum.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p532><ab type=parNum>532</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saalie</hi> <UR>sAlI</UR>.&mdash;A tree of the hills, of which elephants are very fond, and which soon brings them into good condition. It cures boils and eruptions, disorders of blood and mucus, and restrains diarrh&oelig;a. Its branches quickly take root by being planted, and when used as posts for the support of a roof, it quickly covers the whole with its foliage.

<pb id=pb91 n=91><p id=p533><ab type=parNum>533</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saaltie</hi> <UR>sAl'tI</UR>.&mdash;Commonly called <hi>Kaphoor Kutcherie</hi>; cool light, astringent; promotes digestion, cures cough and disorders of the blood. A species of <hi>Kachoor</hi>, having a pleasant smell like Camphor.

<p id=p534><ab type=parNum>534</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saaje</hi> <UR>sAjI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Serje</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p535><ab type=parNum>535</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sawang</hi> <UR>sAUAng</UR>.&mdash;A culinary grain, used by the villagers; it is smaller than the <hi>Badjera</hi>, is smooth and pointed; it grows also wild, of a smaller size. It is cool and dry; useful in bilious disorders and mucus, and dries the seven <hi>d&apos;hats</hi>.

<p id=p536><ab type=parNum>536</ab> <hi rend=sc><corr resp=errata sic=Saale>Saal</corr></hi> <corr sic="<URA>sAlI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>sAl</UR></corr>.&mdash;Sweet to the taste and pungently sweet in digestion; cool, light, astringent; cures disorders of wind, bile, and mucus, and preserves the health. There are other kinds of this, but this is the one to be preferred. One kind is red, called <hi>Rakitsal</hi>; it is nearly of the same nature, (a kind of rice).

<p id=p537><ab type=parNum>537</ab> <hi rend=sc>Salamookh</hi> <UR>sAlAmkx"h</UR>.&mdash;A kind of rice like the former.

<p id=p538><ab type=parNum>538</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saro</hi> <UR>sArU</UR>.&mdash;(<hi>Myna</hi>). Its meat is dry and moist in equal degrees; increases knowledge and appetite, strengthens the system, removes laxities of the bowels, useful in bruises and hurts, relieves cough, lessens mucus and hectic fever; it is called Sawur, and in A. <hi>Zerzore</hi>, P. <hi>Sharug</hi>.

<p id=p539><ab type=parNum>539</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sabur</hi> <UR>sAbr</UR>.&mdash;A kind of deer, whose skin is used in covering sheaths for swords, and by the lower classes and hunters as lining for their clothes. Its meat is sweet; in digestion it is cool, moist, and heavy; increases mucus, and cures disorders from diffusion of bile.

<p id=p540><ab type=parNum>540</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sarass</hi> <UR>sArs</UR>.&mdash;A species of heron, &ldquo;<hi>Ardea Antigone</hi>.&rdquo; A large bird, with a long neck and legs, of a lead color; the male lives always with his mate. Its flesh is cool, moist, and heavy; strengthens the system, decreases urine and fæces, cures disorders of wind, blood and bile.

<p id=p541><ab type=parNum>541</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saamp</hi> <UR>sAmp</UR>.&mdash;The Snake. Its meat is moist and heavy, is vermifuge, and kills worms in the rectum; increases knowledge, strengthens the system. If the old skin when shed be bruised and applied to the eyes, it increases the strength of vision; and if burnt, and its ashes rubbed on parts where no hair grows, it will reproduce it. Snakes avoid its smell when burning, and if the whole skin be tied round the thigh of a woman in labor, it will facilitate the process. P. <hi>Mar</hi>.

<pb id=pb92 n=92><p id=p542><ab type=parNum>542</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saal</hi> <UR>sAl</UR>.&mdash;The name of a common tree, the wood of which is generally useful. It is cool and astringent; cures disorders of wind, mucus, poisons, boils, eruptions, and is beneficial in burns. A. <hi>Saage</hi>.

<p id=p543><ab type=parNum>543</ab> <hi rend=sc>Satoon</hi> <UR>sAtUn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Chitoor</hi>.

<p id=p544><ab type=parNum>544</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sip Kullie</hi> <UR>spklI</UR>.&mdash;The Lizard. A. <hi>Saamaberus</hi>, P. <hi>Chillpusæ</hi>. It does not frequent those places where saffron is kept. If split open and applied to a part where a thorn or arrow may have entered deep, it will effect its extraction by suction.

<p id=p545><ab type=parNum>545</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soopearee</hi> <UR>sUpyArI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Areca Catechu.</hi>&rdquo; Astringent, cool, dry, and heavy; cures disorders of mucus and bile, increases appetite; removes bad taste in the mouth; when fresh it is very heavy and produces flatulence; is diaphoretic; injures appetite and eyesight, and causes a prolonged retention of semen.

<p id=p546><ab type=parNum>546</ab> <hi rend=sc>Subskun</hi> <UR>sbzqnd</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Baraikund</hi>.

<p id=p547><ab type=parNum>547</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sutarie</hi> <UR>stArI</UR>.&mdash;The juice of the <hi>Soopearee</hi> tree; it strengthens the teeth and stomach, contracts the vagina, and cures leucorrh&oelig;a; it is intoxicating.

<p id=p548><ab type=parNum>548</ab> <hi rend=sc>Setoopula</hi> <UR>stUplA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of sugar.

<p id=p549><ab type=parNum>549</ab> <hi rend=sc>Setawur</hi> <UR>stUr</UR>,&mdash;also <hi>Setawurie</hi> or <hi>Shetawur</hi>, vide S.

<p id=p550><ab type=parNum>550</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sutputtrie</hi> <UR>stp'trI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Roocha</hi>, vide R.

<p id=p551><ab type=parNum>551</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sutsar</hi> <UR>stsAr</UR>.&mdash;A kind of cucumber.

<p id=p552><ab type=parNum>552</ab> <hi rend=sc>Suteepulas</hi> <UR>stI plAs</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Kutchoor</hi>.

<p id=p553><ab type=parNum>553</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soocherakhar</hi> <UR>sUchrAkxAr</UR>.&mdash;The common <hi>Sedjee</hi>, (impure carb. of soda.) This name is given to the purer sorts. If 3 mashas be mixed with a cupful of dhaie, it is useful in cholicks. If mixed with lime juice, it is used to write on stone, and the stone placed on a slow fire as long as you can snap your fingers 100 times, and then taken off, when the writing will be found white and permanent. The physician <hi>Nouruddee</hi> has mentioned this to be the case.

<p id=p554><ab type=parNum>554</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sedarth</hi> <UR>sdArt-h"h</UR>.&mdash;Pungent and bitter, hot and dry; cures disorders of mucus, itch, Juzam, apthæ; is vermifuge, and promotes appetite, but causes diffusion of the bile in the blood, and its consequent disorders. The green leaves are heavy and cool. In my opinion they are hot, and obstruct the flow of urine, increase indigestion, and disorders of the three secretions. The above is a white kind of <hi>Sersom</hi>, the name taken from the Sanscrit.

<pb id=pb93 n=93><p id=p555><ab type=parNum>555</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sud Sohaung</hi> <UR>sdsxAng</UR>.&mdash;The name of a red flower in India; its leaves three-cornered, serrated; it is cool, and beneficial in disorders from poisons, bile, blood; in dropsy and nausea; 3 mashas of this bruised and taken with water is useful in gonorrh&oelig;a.

<p id=p556><ab type=parNum>556</ab> <hi rend=sc>Suda Khar</hi> <corr sic="<URA>kxl mAr</URA>" resp=errata><UR>sdAkhUAr</UR></corr>.&mdash;A salt from a grass, very hot, and is used for cleansing lardaceous matter from sores; it increases the opening in boils, but decreases strength.

<p id=p557><ab type=parNum>557</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sudaphill</hi> <UR>sdAp-hl</UR> or <hi>Sudeephill</hi>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Bale</hi>.

<p id=p558><ab type=parNum>558</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sudagolab</hi> <UR>sdAglAb</UR>.&mdash;A flower like the rose. Its tree is larger than the rose-bush, and its flower has a different smell; it is always in flower, from which circumstance it derives its name. I have not seen this noticed in any other work of India, but it is probably the <hi>Koocha</hi>: q. v.

<p id=p559><ab type=parNum>559</ab> <hi rend=sc>Surphoka</hi> <UR>srp-hUnkA</UR>.&mdash;A plant of India, about a yard in height or sometimes more. It is very common; it is also called <hi>Joojer</hi>, and is a kind of <hi>Chirchirra Soorkh</hi>. It is bitter, astringent, and light; cures disorders of the liver and spleen, boils and eruptions, and cough; is an antidote to poisons; useful in disorders of the blood, difficulty of breathing, and fever. I have found it very beneficial in clearing the blood, and useful in correcting bile, curing itch, lues, and other eruptions.

<p id=p560><ab type=parNum>560</ab> <hi rend=sc>Serje</hi> <UR>srj</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Saaje</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Tectona grandis.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p561><ab type=parNum>561</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sooryalee</hi> <UR>srjAlI</UR>.&mdash;A plant about 6 feet high. I have seen it in <hi>Hissar</hi> in abundance; it grows in the rains and spreads over the sides of houses, its stem is then about an inch in diameter; its branches also thin, and of a bright red colour; its flowers are beautiful, white and red; when ripe it in some degree resembles wheat; its flowers are crooked. It is aphrodisiac.

<p id=p562><ab type=parNum>562</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sirpund</hi> <UR>srpnd</UR>.&mdash;Aperient; cures general swellings, and disorders of wind and bile.

<p id=p563><ab type=parNum>563</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sericbans</hi> <UR>srkbAns</UR>.&mdash;Useful in mucous disorders and affections of the eyes.

<p id=p564><ab type=parNum>564</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seriss</hi> <UR>srys</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Mimosa Seris</hi>,&rdquo; called also <hi>Sereeka</hi>; a very large tree of India. Its flowers have a sweet smell, and are very beautiful; it is cool, cures boils and eruptions, poisons, aches, and swellings. If a decoction of the leaves be taken internally in ophthalmia, and the juice of the leaves dropped into the eye, it <pb id=pb94 n=94>will be very useful, and this I have tried. The bark of the tree dried and pounded is excellent when sprinkled on foul ulcers, in which too it kills maggots. The smell of the flower is useful in head-aches and hemicrania, in cough and in jaundice. If the root of the white Seriss be kept in the mouth, it lengthens aphrodisia. Some have called this <hi>Layetoolatees</hi>. If the seeds be bruised with water, and this dropt into the eye, it will remove specks; the oil of the seed is also very effectual for this purpose.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p>&ldquo;Seriss is among the Indian physicians, hot and dry, and in the opinion of some cool and dry; it cures swellings and wind. If the bark of the stem, the bark of the root, with the flowers and seeds of each, 3 mashas, be bruised, sifted, and mixed with cow&apos;s urine, and taken thrice a day, it will cure the bite of a snake, and for one whole year no reptile will injure you. The bark of an aged tree is the best. When the sun shall be in the division Joura, if daily for three days, 6 mashas of the bark be taken in congee, it will render the person invulnerable to the bite of any noxious reptile for a year. If the oil be extracted by heat from the seeds, and applied to the white spots of leprosy, it will cure them.&rdquo;

<p id=p565><ab type=parNum>565</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sirool</hi> <UR>srUl</UR>.&mdash;Bitter, hot, and light; cures affections of the throat, ear, eye, and disorders of wind.

<p id=p566><ab type=parNum>566</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sirsom</hi> <UR>srsm</UR> or <hi>Seerkup</hi>. P. <hi>Sirshuph</hi>.&mdash;In India this is used to produce a very common oil; it is hot, and increases disorders of the mouth, and decreases mucus and semen; expels wind; is vermifuge, and if much be taken it will injure the eyesight; if a woman uses it during the lochial discharge, it will increase her strength and improve her complexion. One kind of this is white, and is called <hi>Sedarth</hi>, q. v.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Sinapis Dichotoma</hi>, (Roxb. MS.) Sp. ch. dichotomous, siliques cylindric, smooth, spreading, bark straight and tapering, leaves stem-clasping; the lower somewhat lyred, superior ovate, lanceolate, entire, all are smooth, as are also stem and branches.&rdquo; Roxb.

<p id=p567><ab type=parNum>567</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soorunkitki</hi> <UR>srn k'tkI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of Ketki, like the <hi>Sinobir</hi>. It has twelve leaves or more in the flower, its scent is sweet and soft. The plant flowers only once in 6 or 7 years; both kinds are sweet, <pb id=pb95 n=95>cool, bitter, pungent, and light, and cure disorders of mucus. The juice of the <hi>Keora</hi> is also used for the same purpose, and mixed with it, is cardiac. The <hi>Ketki</hi> is a variety of <hi>Keora</hi>.

<p id=p568><ab type=parNum>568</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sirunmaki</hi> <UR>srn mAkI</UR>.&mdash;It is astringent, pungent, light, aphrodisiac and cardiac; cures Juzam, swellings of the body, piles, seminal weakness, pains in the urinary bladder, marasmus, disorders of the blood, and dropsy; is an antidote to poisons; cures hectic fever; clears the throat, and is an ingredient in all favorite formulæ.

<p id=p569><ab type=parNum>569</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seroopjeea</hi> <UR>srUp jyA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Jeeaphup</hi>.

<p id=p570><ab type=parNum>570</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seriepurnie</hi> <UR>srI prnI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Arnee</hi>, also called <hi>Gumbar</hi>.

<p id=p571><ab type=parNum>571</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seroopbudder</hi> <UR>srUp bdr</UR>.&mdash;A name also of <hi>Gumbar</hi>.

<p id=p572><ab type=parNum>572</ab> <hi rend=sc>Surwalla</hi> <UR>srUAlA</UR>.&mdash;The name of a common shrub.

<p id=p573><ab type=parNum>573</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sussa</hi> <UR>sUsA</UR>.&mdash;A name for the hare. The meat is sweet, cool, and light; induces costiveness, increases appetite, cures difficulty of breathing and sunpat, removes dysentery, and is both a medicine and article of diet.

<p id=p574><ab type=parNum>574</ab> <hi rend=sc>Suffrie Amer</hi> <UR>sfrI Anbr</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Guava</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Psidium pyriferum</hi>.&rdquo; Vide <hi>Anervade</hi>.

<p id=p575><ab type=parNum>575</ab> <hi rend=sc>Segund Philla</hi> <UR>skndp-hlA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of date.

<p id=p576><ab type=parNum>576</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soogunass</hi> <UR>sUgnAs</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Arloo</hi>.

<p id=p577><ab type=parNum>577</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sillajeet</hi> <UR>sylAjyt</UR>, also <hi>Silladeet</hi>, <hi>Styrax</hi> or <hi>Storax</hi>; a balsam, pungent, bitter, and stimulating, more pungent in digestion; hot, cures seminal weakness, piles from cold, Juzam, dropsy, marasmus, difficulty of breathing, tabes, idiotism, swellings of the body, disorders of mucus and blood. Is vermifuge, lithontriptic, and otherwise generally useful. It in one of the most powerful remedies; is stronger than any other ingredient in whatever formulæ it may form a part, and it increases the effects of all others; it is the favorite medicine of all Indian physicians.

<p><hi>Sut Sillajeet</hi> is the strongest, for this means <hi>Sillajeet</hi> in a refined state. I have found it excellent in gonorrh&oelig;a, and for thickening the seminal fluid; also for strengthening the kidnies and urinary bladder. The mode of preparing it, is as follows:

<p>The <hi>Sillajeet</hi> is dissolved in water and placed in the sun in a new earthen vessel till it becomes thick, and its color assumes a reddish or yellowish hue; then it must be taken from the surface <pb id=pb96 n=96>as much as is clean, and preserved in another new vessel; this too is placed in the sun, well protected from dust, till it becomes dry. This is the <hi>Sut Sillajeet</hi>, and what remains in the first vessel is again purified in the same manner for three different times, and each time the pure drug is dried as above. It is easily purified by fire, and more quickly; but this is much to be preferred. It is brought from the hills ready prepared.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Sillajeet</hi> is the urine of the hill wild goat, which when the animal is rutting, is discharged on the stones and evaporated by the sun&apos;s heat. It is found in small quantities, of a black color. It is hot in the 3rd, and dry in the 2nd degree. In the opinion of Indian physicians, it is useful in all kinds of seminal weakness, in swellings, in Juzam, epilepsy, diabetes, stone in the bladder, and in gravel. The <hi>Sillajeet</hi> is often mixed with lime, but the adulteration is discovered by the change of color. Some have said that it is the urine of the wild ass, found as above. The purified kind is the best. In Juzam, if ate for 40 days, it is a cure, and even in the last stages of the disease it is beneficial. It loosens wind and phlegm.&rdquo;

<p id=p578><ab type=parNum>578</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sillaruss</hi> <UR>sylArs</UR>.&mdash;Hot and moist; increases eyesight and semen, and cures Juzam and itch. A. <hi>Myasayela</hi>.

<p id=p579><ab type=parNum>579</ab> <hi rend=sc>Somooderphill</hi> <UR>smdrp-hl</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, more black in color than the Hurr, of a square shape, and its corners of a red color; these, however, also become black from age; mixed with human milk and used as a cephalic, it will cause a discharge of all phlegm from the head. If mixed with the juice of the <hi>Gooma</hi>, it will cure hemicrania. The bark of the root is very efficacious in swellings of the hands and feet; and ate with salt and anise seed in warm water, it will be found excellent in pains of the bowels.

<p>Some have named this <hi>Hubbooneel</hi>, but how far this is correct I know not.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Somoderphill</hi> is hot and dry; if introduced into the nose with goat&apos;s milk or urine, it will cure head-ache, hemicrania, suppressed mucus, &amp;c. If mixed with goat&apos;s urine and applied to the <pb id=pb97 n=97>eyes, it will cure night blindness, and removes opacities in the cornea. Mixed with human urine, it is both ate and applied to the nose in bites of snakes, and with sheep&apos;s urine or buffaloe&apos;s dung is applied to the pubis in the cure of diabetes; mixed with turmeric, it is an useful application to the spots of white leprosy; with sugar, ate for the cure of seminal weakness; with aniseed, in pains of the bowels; with cow&apos;s urine, in hiccup; with <hi>dhaie</hi>, as an astringent; with ginger, in rheumatism; with human urine, in black jaundice; with cow&apos;s urine, in mesenteric obstructions of children; and for those who are dull of hearing, mixed with <hi>Bhangra</hi> or honey, as an application to the inside of the ear. In restrained or obstructed lochia, or retention of the placenta, with asaf&oelig;tida; and with cloves and sugar, in intermittent fever.<corr>&rdquo;</corr>

<p id=p580><ab type=parNum>580</ab> <hi rend=sc>Somooder Phane</hi> <UR>smdrp-hyn</UR>.&mdash;<hi rend=sc>Sponge.</hi>

<p id=p581><ab type=parNum>581</ab> <hi rend=sc>Somooder Lone</hi> <UR>smdrlUn</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Murias Sodæ.</hi> The sea salt; it is sweet and bitter, hot and cool, in equal degrees; tonic, anthelmintic, purgative; promotes appetite and digestion, cures disorders of wind, and corrects irregularities of bile and mucus.

<p id=p582><ab type=parNum>582</ab> <hi rend=sc>Somoodersake</hi> <UR>smdrsy'k</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Convolvulus Argenteus</hi>, also <hi>Ruttunmala</hi>.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi><corr sic=Maadentezurrubad>Maadentezerrubad</corr></hi>.

<p>&ldquo;A seed like the mustard; black and aperient, cool and <corr sic=mois>moist</corr>, in the 1st degree; is aphrodisiac; strengthens the stomach, removes heat of urine, gonorrh&oelig;a, thinness of semen, the secretion of which it thickens and increases. It is astringent, and produces flatulence. Its corrector is sugar; its succed. <hi>Sireyara</hi>: dose six mashas.&rdquo;

<p id=p583><ab type=parNum>583</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sungtirra</hi> <UR>sngtyrA</UR>.&mdash;The author of the <hi>Ayeen Akberry</hi> calls it <hi>Sontirra</hi>. A fruit of India of great esteem; it is of a yellowish red color, in shape like the apple, but larger. Its rind is fine, soft, and smooth, like the Sylhet orange, which it in all respects much resembles. It is large, sweet, and acid. There are different names for the different kinds of oranges, but this is the largest and best. It is in my opinion cool, cardiac, drying; allays heat and thirst, and prevents the ill effects of wind, loosens phlegm and bile, strengthens the stomach; is very grateful when ate with sugar; and its acid is less hurtful than many others. I <pb id=pb98 n=98>have known a man of a bilious temperament, who told me that he always found relief from the use of this orange. The emperor was in the habit of eating it in <hi>Pilaus</hi>, when sweetened with sugar and rose-water, and thus used, he called it Rahut Jahn. It is thus rendered more cooling and more grateful to the taste. He also ate it when cooled in ice, and found it useful in giving tone to the stomach. The people of India use it with their food. If ate after having been sprinkled with a little salt, its acid will have less effect on the teeth, mouth, and throat; this however, can only be necessary when unripe or not of the best kind. &ldquo;Many more trivial properties are ascribed to this orange in the original, which would only be waste of time and paper to record.&rdquo;&mdash;<hi>Trans.</hi> It is said to be hurtful in coughs, and colds.

<p id=p584><ab type=parNum>584</ab> <hi rend=sc>Singhara</hi> <UR>snkxArA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Trapa natuns.</hi>&rdquo; &ldquo;<hi>Trapa Bispinosa.</hi>&rdquo; A common triangular water-nut, like the <hi>hermodactyls</hi>; it is the produce of ponds or reservoirs of water. When green and unripe, it is pleasantest to the taste; when ripe, it becomes hard, and when dried, more so; it is much employed in aphrodisiac formulæ. It is sweet, cool, and heavy; cures bilious disorders, and those of blood; removes heat of the body, restrains laxities in the bowels, and increases semen. It is generally liked and universally eaten.

<p id=p585><ab type=parNum>585</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sindoorie</hi> <UR>sndUrI</UR>.&mdash;A name for Sudá Sohágun.

<p id=p586><ab type=parNum>586</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sunkaholie</hi> <UR>snkA hUlI</UR>.&mdash;A small plant, with very thin branches like common grass; its leaves are very small; it is a creeper on the ground; its flower white and small, and looks very beautiful in the evenings or in moonlight nights. It is astringent, hot, and moist; aperient and aphrodisiac; increases memory, understanding, and perception, and likewise discrimination; cures seminal weakness, and forms an ingredient in all favorite formulæ; cures gonorrh&oelig;a; and I have often used the bark of its root as an aphrodisiac and for increasing the consistence of semen. Some have called this <hi>Soorch</hi>.

<p id=p587><ab type=parNum>587</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sunn</hi> <UR>sn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Crotalaria Juncea.</hi>&rdquo; A plant, the bark of which is used as hemp; it is usually sown around cotton fields. It is of two kinds, the second called <hi>Rasni</hi>. It is pungent and acid, and its leaves are used as a culinary vegetable; it is cool, <pb id=pb99 n=99>heavy, and astringent. Its flower is used as an astringent in lochial discharge.

<p id=p588><ab type=parNum>588</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sunkh</hi> <UR>snk"h</UR>.&mdash;A white shell of a very large size; cool, light; strengthens the eye-sight, cures mucous disorders, and those of bile and blood. A. <hi>Hulzoom</hi>. There is a small kind called <hi>Cowrie</hi>; if this be burnt and calcined, it will quickly dry up sores by being sprinkled over them.

<p id=p589><ab type=parNum>589</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sebaloo</hi> <UR>sybAlU</UR>.&mdash;or <hi>Sebalie</hi>, or <hi>Nindee</hi>, see N. <hi>Vitex Trifolia</hi>.

<p id=p590><ab type=parNum>590</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sindoor</hi> <UR>sndUr</UR>.&mdash;The red oxide of lead, used externally. &ldquo;<hi>Sindoora</hi>, S.&rdquo; Hot; cures acne and Juzam, and disorders of poison, boils, and eruptions; clears wounds; promotes the junction of broken bones. The ointment of this is very excellent in sores. The receipt is to be found in many other works.

<p id=p591><ab type=parNum>591</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soomboolkhar</hi> <UR>snbAlkhAr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>The white Oxide of Arsenic.</hi>&rdquo; It is white and like alum in color; it ought to be chosen thus: when rubbed on a crow&apos;s feather and put over the fire, if it does not smoke, and the feather becomes white, it is good. A. <hi>Toorabalhalik</hi>. There are six kinds of this, one named <hi>Sunkia</hi>, the third <hi>Godunta</hi>, the fourth <hi>Darma</hi>, the fifth <hi>Huldia</hi>; but each will be noticed under its own proper head. The Yunani physicians do not allow this to form a part of their prescriptions, as they believe it destroys the vital principle; and such medicines as are deleterious in their effects, such as opium, they always exhibit with correctors, for this reason such remedies are seldom noticed or used by them. The physicians of India, on the contrary, find these drugs more effectual in many disorders than others of less power, and such the calx of metals. For this reason too, I am in the habit of seldom giving these remedies internally, but I usually confine my use of them to external application, and as aphrodisiacs, which I prescribe to a few friends, who may have derived no benefit from Yunani prescriptions. It is better, however, to use as few of them as possible. The sixth kind is <hi>Hurtaal</hi>.

<p id=p592><ab type=parNum>592</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sunkia</hi> <UR>snkyA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of arsenic.

<p id=p593><ab type=parNum>593</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sunkhal</hi> <UR>snk-hAl</UR>.&mdash;A species of <hi>Bindaloo</hi>.

<p id=p594><ab type=parNum>594</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sungjerahut</hi> <UR>sng jrAHt</UR>.&mdash;It obtains its name from being useful in wounds. Throughout India it is also known by the name of <hi>Sungderaz</hi>. It is a stone of very soft consistence; cool and <pb id=pb100 n=100>light; beneficial in fever, bile, asthma, pains in the chest, flatulence, and laxities in the bowels; and when used in ointment, dries up ulcerated parts, removes pain, and acts as an absorbent in the stomach and bowels. I have found it by experience to be extremely useful in the before-mentioned complaints, also in diarrh&oelig;a; in Hindostan it is called <hi>Surkoola</hi>.

<p id=p595><ab type=parNum>595</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sungjoothka</hi> <UR>sng jUt-hkA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Jui</hi>; having a white flower.

<p id=p596><ab type=parNum>596</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soorinjoothka</hi> <UR>sUrnjUt-hkA</UR>.&mdash;Also a name for the above; having a yellow flower.

<p id=p597><ab type=parNum>597</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sonamukie</hi> <UR>sUnAmkxI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Marka sheesha</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Marcasite</hi> stone.&rdquo;

<p id=p598><ab type=parNum>598</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sooroon</hi> <UR>sUrUn</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Baharkund</hi>, called <hi>Zemeekund</hi>. A root, resembling a turtle, used in India as pickles; it is dressed with meat, and also used by itself; it is dry, light, and stomachic; useful in disorders of <corr sic=phelgm>phlegm</corr> and piles; it produces eruptions from diffusion of bile, and some have called it difficult of digestion. Those who are in a reduced state, or have weak stomachs, had better not eat more than 20 direms. To my knowledge, it is much used in piles; it is said to be beneficial in cholics and pains in the bowels. It increases bile; and is hurtful in disorders of blood; it is also injurious to the throat. Its correctors are fresh <hi>dhaie</hi>, and being parboiled in water and the water changed. It may also be corrected by being boiled with tamarind or anula leaves. Enclosed in clay and roasted in an oven, the outer rind pulled off, it will be found less hurtful; in any other manner it irritates the throat. If used in powder, it must be skinned and dried in the shade; one kind of it is white inside, and of a purple color externally. A third is white on both sides; the former is the strongest: it is also named <hi>Soorunsona</hi>.

<p id=p599><ab type=parNum>599</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soombullie</hi> <UR>snblI</UR>.&mdash;Pungent and bitter, cures disorders of wind and mucus, and is an ingredient in favorite formulæ.

<p id=p600><ab type=parNum>600</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soos</hi> <UR>sUs</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The <hi>Porpus Delphinus</hi>.&rdquo; Its flesh is moist and heavy, cures disorders of wind, and increases semen and mucus. P. <hi>Khookmaié</hi>. A. <hi>Delphine</hi>. The author of the <hi>Echtyarat</hi> has described this as a large fish of a black color, with a head like that of the hog.

<pb id=pb101 n=101><p id=p601><ab type=parNum>601</ab> <hi rend=sc>Suer</hi> <UR>sUyr</UR>.&mdash;See <hi>Kual</hi>.

<p id=p602><ab type=parNum>602</ab> <hi rend=sc>Suwa</hi> <UR>sUA</UR>.&mdash;Its flesh is cool, dry, light, and astringents; useful in bruises; cures phlegm, cough, and hectic fever. A. <hi>Begha</hi>.

<p id=p603><ab type=parNum>603</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soopee</hi> <UR>sUpI</UR>.&mdash;Any kind of fried pea, deprived of its shell.

<p id=p604><ab type=parNum>604</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sona</hi> <UR>sUnA</UR>.&mdash;A precious metal; cool, heavy, and aphrodisiac; beneficial as an antidote to poisons, and in repressing the three secretions; used in mania, fever, and dryness; clears the complexion, and is an ingredient in all favorite formulæ. When prepared for use, it is called <hi>Mirganick</hi>.

<p id=p605><ab type=parNum>605</ab> <hi rend=sc>Somph</hi> <UR>sUnp</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Aniseed, <hi>Pimpinella Anisum</hi>.&rdquo; One kind of it is called <hi>Seethka</hi>, the other <hi>Sowa</hi>; the former means the largest kind; both are bitter, sweet, hot, and light; improves appetite; cure affections of wind and mucus; useful in cholic, boils, eruptions, and all disorders of the eyes, and increases bile. One kind, the latter, is used for disorders of females. A. <hi>Razeena</hi>. P. <hi>Valanbuzury</hi>.

<p id=p606><ab type=parNum>606</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sonth</hi> <UR>sUn't"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Amomum Zingiber.</hi>&rdquo; The dried root; moist and light; sweet during digestion, and hot; promotes appetite and digestion; allays vomiting, cures difficulty of breathing, cough, itch, affections of the heart, swellings of the scrotum, and swellings in general; rheumatic pains in the joints, pains of the urinary bladder, piles, and flatulence, and clears the voice. Pills made of <hi>Sonth</hi> are very generally beneficial, and the result of my experience I have published at full in my other works.

<p id=p607><ab type=parNum>607</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sowa</hi> <UR>sUA</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Shibbet</hi>. P. <hi>Wallankhoord</hi>. Hot, dry, and aperient; its smell soporific; its leaves hurtful to the stomach. The seed Dill. <hi>Anethum Sowa</hi>, Roxb.

<p id=p608><ab type=parNum>608</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soonchur</hi> <UR>sUnchr</UR>.&mdash;A name for the salt <hi>Soonchur</hi>, also Soonchill.

<p id=p609><ab type=parNum>609</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soorjemooki</hi> <UR>srj mk-hI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Adittbaqut</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Helianthus Annuus.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p610><ab type=parNum>610</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sooderie</hi> <UR>sUdrI</UR>.&mdash;Its smell is strong and penetrating, like an animal in the rutting season; pungent and hot; beneficial in wind and fever, and clears the voice; the black kind is used in various formulæ.

<p id=p611><ab type=parNum>611</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soubustanee</hi> <UR>sUystAnI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Valanchoord</hi>.

<p id=p612><ab type=parNum>612</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sooe Junglie</hi> <UR>sUI jnglI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Pitpapra</hi>.

<pb id=pb102 n=102><p id=p613><ab type=parNum>613</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soonkullie</hi> <UR>sUnklI</UR>.&mdash;A shrub hurtful to animals.

<p id=p614><ab type=parNum>614</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sowall</hi> <UR>sUAl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Thaleeb</hi>. Cool; improves the color of the skin; cures remittents, and a little of it introduced into the parts of both sexes, useful in gonorrh&oelig;a.

<p id=p615><ab type=parNum>615</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soorudjjhall</hi> <UR>sUrj jxAl</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A name for <hi>Lootooperie</hi>.

<p id=p616><ab type=parNum>616</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sohora</hi> <UR>sxUrA</UR>.&mdash;Cures affections of blood and mucus, and restrains laxities of the bowels.

<p id=p617><ab type=parNum>617</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sahunserbede</hi> <UR>sxnsrbyd</UR>.&mdash;A soft stone, of a dark-red color; cool and dry in the second degree; used by Indian physicians in disorders of blood, in laxatives from indigestion, acne, boils, psora, and infantile eruptions; given with milk or butter to the quantity from two to four soorkhs.

<p id=p618><ab type=parNum>618</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sohunjena</hi> <UR>s-hjnA</UR>.&mdash;or <hi>Sahinjena</hi>, or <hi>Sajena</hi>, or <hi>Sekir</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Hyperanthera morunga</hi>, W. <hi>Sobhanjana</hi>, S. <hi>Guilandina moringa</hi>. The root of the tree scraped exactly resembles horse-radish, and is used as such in all parts of India. It is a rubifacient, and useful as a stimulant.&rdquo; A tree common in India; hot and light; useful in disorders of the eyes; creates appetite; restrains diarrh&oelig;a, cures disorders of wind, mucus, acne, and swellings of the body, affections of the spleen, boils, and eruptions, and cleanses the blood. It is of three kinds; the second kind, which is red, is said to be aperient and astringent; in other properties the same. Its flower is heavy and astringent; cures disorders of mucus, swellings of the body, and increases the wind. The people of India use its flowers as a pickle in oil, and my father used to recommend this pickle to those of a cold temperament, but it is prejudicial to the eyes; it is thus prepared:

<p>The flowers are put into water for a day, and washed; a little mustard seed added, and the whole put into <hi>serson</hi> oil. This pickle is less hot than the plant. Pickle made from the root, removes wind; the leaves bruised and applied to ulcers, cleans and heals them.

<p id=p619><ab type=parNum>619</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sahidei</hi> <UR>sxydI</UR>.&mdash;A plant about half a yard in height; its leaves like the <hi>Toolsi</hi>, cool and moist; useful in suppressed wind, fever, pains in the limbs, swellings of the throat; its use increases the complexion and volume of blood. It is used for killing mercury.

<pb id=pb103 n=103><p id=p620><ab type=parNum>620</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sohaga</hi> <UR>sxAg"h</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Tunkhar</hi>.

<p id=p621><ab type=parNum>621</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sembill</hi> <UR>synbl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Bombax Heptaphyllum.</hi> Silk-cotton Tree.&rdquo; A large tree of India; its leaves like the Jamin, but broader and more long, about half the breadth of the peepul and twice the length; in thickness, color, and mark, the same. Its flowers resemble the <hi>Bukaen</hi> when small, but when more advanced, it becomes more like the <hi>goolur</hi>, and when full grown, the flowers are as large as a large lime. It then spreads and becomes red; after this it again closes; the flower then falls, and leaves the seed vessel. The capsule is twice as large as that of the <hi>Mudar</hi>, and when ripe, is filled with cotton. I have ate of the flower when at its middle growth, and found it pleasant to the taste, but it produces flatulence. It is cool and aphrodisiac; induces corpulence; is astringent, and cures boils and eruptions, Juzam, and disorders of the blood and bile: some call its gum <hi>Moocherus</hi>, the author of the Topha for instance; but <hi>Moocherus</hi> is the gum or flower of the Phoopul tree. In the opinion of the physicians of India, the Sembill is a powerful medicine as an aphrodisiac. If the juice of the root be made into sherbet with equal part of sugar, it will increase age by restoring the vital energy, increase understanding and semen; the larger and older the tree, and the thicker the root, the greater its strength as a medicine. The small roots are cut into slices, dried on a rope, and sold; in this state, it resembles <hi>Bhamun Soorkh</hi>.

<p>Ascetics have said, that the perpendicular root of a large full grown Sembill tree, cut in pieces, dried and reduced to a powder is powerfully aphrodisiac, in the quantity of 4 direms daily. I have taken this powder to the quantity of one tolah with sugar, and have also prescribed it with advantage; it strengthens the stomach, and is gently laxative. If given with honey, I conceive that its virtues will be increased. The author of the celebrated work <hi>Ahmed Ben Shirazee</hi> has told the following story, which I shall relate as nearly as may be in his own words. &ldquo;I was,&rdquo; says he, &ldquo;on a journey, when coming to a village in India, and being very thirsty, I met an old man from whom I requested water to drink; I observed that this old man had a peculiarly healthy appearance, and seemed plump and stout; he had a young woman <pb id=pb104 n=104>with him, whom he sent to his house for water, and who brought it me to drink. I then asked him whether that young girl was his daughter; he laughing answered that she was his wife, and that he had three others equally young. I was somewhat surprised at this, and asked him if this was not too many for him; he replied no! More and more astonished, I asked him if this was really the case; he avowed it to be so. I then questioned him how he came to be endowed with so much strength, and how old he was; he told me that his age was 110 years, and related the following facts: That when 50 years&apos; old he had already become aged and feeble, and was so much decayed in constitution, that he seldom rose from his bed, and when he did so, was obliged to support himself on a crutch. That a fakeer passing that way observed his feeble state, and feeling compassion for his helpless situation, asked him what ailed him: he replied, nothing; but that old age had come upon him. The fakeer then gave him a medicine which he had taken ever since, with an injunction to abstain from all acids: this he had done, and that the effect was such as I saw. He likewise told me that he had a son nearly 80 years of age, who had also used the fakeer&apos;s prescription, and who was much stouter and more healthy in every respect than he.

<p>&ldquo;Astonished at this relation, I procured the receipt, and thus hand it down to posterity.

<p>&ldquo;Take the white roots of a full grown, healthy Sembill tree, which is soft; cut them in pieces, dry them in the shade, and reduce them to a powder: sift it very fine, with equal parts of sugar, and over the fire, form it into an electuary: of this 5 direms are to be eaten daily, and no acid to be used.

<p>&ldquo;To this the old man swore, and brought his son and introduced him to me to prove the truth of his story. The son corroborated the assertion of his father, and added that he had ate the remedy only two years, when he became as he then was; certain it is, he had not a grey hair in his head.&rdquo;

<p id=p622><ab type=parNum>622</ab> <hi rend=sc>Semb</hi> <UR>synb</UR>.&mdash;also Séme. A common creeper; its leaves very green and small, broad in the centre and pointed: a smaller leaf rising from the same part of the stem; its flower is small and of a yellowish color. Its seed is like the pistachio nut, but more broad <pb id=pb105 n=105>and longer in some degree, like the stone of the tamarind; it is called Báklá Hindui; it is cool, astringent, flatulent, and from its astringency strengthens the stomach; is aphrodisiac; cures bilious disorders; increases mucus, and the Hindoos have recommended it for the cure of wind; but in this I do not concur, as it is rather apt to produce wind; they are however in the habit of recommending all medicines that procure a discharge of flatus. One kind is called <hi>Golesemb</hi>, also called <hi>Krishnphilla</hi>; its seed is larger and longer than the one now described; it is hot, and cures disorders of wind, bile, and mucus.

<p id=p623><ab type=parNum>623</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sehoond</hi> <UR>sxUnd</UR>.&mdash;A prickly plant, growing wild. A. <hi>Zakoom</hi>. It is so called, but the seed of the Zakoom is said to be like the Hurr, whereas the Sehoond has no seed; it is pungent, heavy, laxative; increases appetite, cures dropsy; is an antidote to poison, useful in affections of the spleen, Juzam, idiotism, marasmus, and itchiness of the bowels, flatulent swellings, badgola, swellings in general, and is lithontriptic. The best kind is red or of a rose color; its milk is also red, but if put on a cloth it becomes white. All kinds of it are used in transmutation of metals. There are several kinds in use for various purposes, the juice is an ingredient in many formulæ.

<p id=p624><ab type=parNum>624</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sisoo</hi> <UR>sysU</UR> or <hi>Sishum</hi>, and another kind called <hi>Rusispa</hi>. It is a very common tree of Hindostan, large like the Jamin, and its wood is durable and excellent; it is not readily attacked by insects nor liable to decay. If cut down when the moon is in the wane, no insect will ever touch it; its leaves are small and round, a little inclining to oval, with very little point, like the leaf of the Semb. Its seed-vessel is light, and contains only two or three seeds; it is about half an inch long; both kinds of the tree are hot, and reduce corpulency. It also causes abortions; cures Juzam and white leprosy; is vermifuge; removes pains in the urinary bladder; useful in boils, eruptions, heat of body, disorders of the blood and mucus, and allays vomiting. It is particularly useful in disorders of the blood and cuticular eruptions; this is a favorite wood among Europeans. It is also useful in Lues Venerea, and is thus used: one and half masha of the filings of the centre or dark-colored wood is boiled in 3/4 pound of water, till only one-half shall remain, <pb id=pb106 n=106>then strain and drink with the following plain sherbet: the same quantity repeated in the evening, and every five or six days. The sherbet of Morukub mixed or drank with it. This must be repeated for 14, or 21, or 40 days.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Receipt for the plain Sherbet.</hi>

<p>Filings of the wood, a pound, infused in 12 lbs. of river water, for 24 hours, then boiled, and when half is evaporated, strain and add to it 3 rittals of sugar (23 ounces), and preserve for use. Six tolahs to be taken morning and evening, with the decoction above specified. If this is required of additional strength, four tolahs of Pitpapra is to be added when the decoction is nearly complete.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Receipt for the mixed Sherbet.</hi>

<p>When the above sherbet is nearly ready for use, add to it Soorinjan (Hermodactyls), Irkhir (Camel&apos;s hay), each three tolahs and 9 mashas, separately bruised, strained, and gradually mixed; when fully boiled add 10 tolahs of senna, and take it from the fire. If this is required of additional virtue for the cure of foulness of the blood and Lues Venerea, add four tolahs of the Pitpapra before the others are mixed with it. Ten tolahs of this in the morning is to be used as before specified. No food to be used during the cure, except kullia, pillau, and bread; no acid to be admitted, and no greens of any description, and the day on which the mixed sherbet is taken, even bread is not to be eaten. &ldquo;<hi>Dalbergia Sissoo.</hi> Roxb.&rdquo;

<p id=p625><ab type=parNum>625</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sial</hi> <UR>syAl</UR> &ldquo;<hi>The Jackal.</hi>&rdquo; Its flesh strengthens the system, increases semen, cures disorders of wind and hectic fever. A. <hi>Ebnáávee</hi>. P. <hi>Sheghal</hi>.

<p id=p626><ab type=parNum>626</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sendhi</hi> <UR>synd-hI</UR>.&mdash;The juice of the date tree; this is less powerful than the tarrie; it is flatulent and aperient; induces corpulency, and is aphrodisiac.

<p id=p627><ab type=parNum>627</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sendhæ</hi> <UR>synd-hI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Kutcherie</hi>.

<p id=p628><ab type=parNum>628</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sealie</hi> <UR>syAlI</UR>.&mdash;The wild carrot, long and cone-shaped. A. <hi>Shakakul</hi>.

<p id=p629><ab type=parNum>629</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seenaki</hi> <corr sic="<URA>snAqyA</URA>" resp=errata><UR>snAqI</UR></corr>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Karoonus Soombul</hi>.

<p id=p630><ab type=parNum>630</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seenku</hi> <corr sic="<URA>snykU</URA>" resp=errata><UR>synkU</UR></corr>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Shummie</hi>, vide Sh.

<p id=p631><ab type=parNum>631</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seotie</hi> <UR>syUtI</UR> vide <hi>Kurkooja</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Rosa glandulifera.</hi> Roxb.&rdquo;

<pb id=pb107 n=107><p id=p632><ab type=parNum>632</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seelidj</hi> <UR>sylj</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Chéreela</hi>, which grows in stony places or near water; it has a sweet smell; is bitter and cool, cures mucous and bilious disorders, heat, thirst, vomiting, and asthmas.

<p id=p633><ab type=parNum>633</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seep</hi> <UR>syp</UR> or <hi>Seepie</hi>. A name for <hi>Suduf</hi> (a shell). It is pungent, shining, and promotes digestion and appetite, strengthens the system, and is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p634><ab type=parNum>634</ab> <hi rend=sc>Saeb</hi> <UR>sAyb</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Tuffah</hi>. In Yunani works, the Indian kind is called <hi>Harara</hi> or <hi>Seoharara</hi>; it is cardiac, and its preserve is more so; it is aphrodisiac, and produces flatulence; when unripe it is acid and astringent, and hurtful, produces cough and decreases bile. Its corrector is salt.

<p id=p635><ab type=parNum>635</ab> <hi rend=sc>Seetaphill</hi> <UR>sytAp-hl</UR>.&mdash;The common <hi>Shereefa</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p636><ab type=parNum>636</ab> <hi rend=sc>Singia</hi> <UR>snkyA</UR> or <hi>Singia Jur</hi>, (Aconite.) A root like Gentian, but a most deadly poison, and as such used by the Nepaulese. It is also called <hi>Singia Khar</hi> or <hi>Beechnak</hi>. It is described in several works as a most active poison, and not to be given by itself even in the smallest quantity. It is made up for internal use as follows:

<p>Take of quicksilver, <hi>Singia</hi>, <hi>Hurtaal</hi> (refined), chillies, sulphur (purified), <hi>Peepul</hi>, fine ginger, <hi>Hurrha</hi>, (large) <hi>Anula</hi>, borax (refined), <hi>Bahera</hi>, nutmeg, each a pice weight.

<p>Mix the quicksilver and sulphur together with a little of the juice of the <hi>Bhangra</hi>, then add the Hurtaal, rubbing them well, and add all the others, with more of the juice of the Bhangra, till 10 pint bottles or five seers shall be expended; this and these must be rubbed continually during 12 days, and till it acquires the consistence of a mass proper for pills. It is then to be made up into small pills of the size of a small pea each. These are given one for a dose, with the following vehicles, and in the cure of the following disorders; and during their exhibition, only simple food, and no acid to be used.


<p><table>
<row><cell>With <cell>Kutkuleja leaves, in                      <cell>Vomiting, Cholera, &amp;c.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Cow&apos;s urine, in the cure of          <cell>Diarrh&oelig;a.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Toolsi leaves,                            <cell>Internal heat.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Lime juice, and applied to the eyes,      <cell>Evil spirits depart.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Kusskuss water, in the cure of            <cell>Bilious disorders.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Tirphilla and ginger, in                  <cell>Asthma.

<pb id=pb108 n=108>

<row><cell>With <cell>Seed of Methi infusion,              <cell>Dysentery.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Honey,                             <cell>Emaciation.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Ditto, to thicken                  <cell>Semen.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Butch, in the cure of              <cell>Tooth-ache.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Pounded Kusskuss,                  <cell>Dropsy.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Nutmeg,                            <cell>Rheumatism from wind.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Onion Juice,                       <cell>Bites of snakes.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Infus. of Adjwain,                 <cell>Thirst.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell><note n=A id=n108.1>Often tried with effect.</note>Juice of Kussownda,             <cell>Wind.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Radish juice,                      <cell>Offensive breath.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell><ref target=n108.1 type=noteref>&ast;</ref>Soopearie juice, (rubbed,)      <cell>Cholicks of children.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Gopie earth,                       <cell>Strangury.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Cow&apos;s Ghee,                   <cell>Bites of snakes.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Root of Semel tree,                <cell>Every thing.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Old Goor,                          <cell>Internal heat.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell><ref target=n108.1 type=noteref>&ast;</ref>Eleachee, (Guzerathee,)         <cell>Intermittents.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Mugrela and salt,                  <cell>Indigestion.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Doob grass,                        <cell>Diarrh&oelig;a.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Mace, externally in                <cell>Night blindness.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Goonchee, in the cure of           <cell>General Rheumatism.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Pith of Bela,                      <cell>Vertigo.
<row><cell><ditto>With</ditto> <cell>Water of burnt wheat,              <cell>Sunpat.
</table>




<div1 id=sheen>
<head><UR>sh</UR></head>


<p id=p637><ab type=parNum>637</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shaldan</hi> <UR>shAlI d-hAn</UR>.&mdash;A kind of rice, in virtue like the <hi>Saatie</hi>.

<p id=p638><ab type=parNum>638</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shalook</hi> <UR>shAlU'k</UR>.&mdash;The root of the <hi>Kawul</hi> flower, q. v.

<p id=p639><ab type=parNum>639</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shubbe</hi> <UR>shbI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Polyanthes Tuberosa.</hi> The name of a common flower, which has a strong scent in the night; it is of several kinds, white, yellow, red, and yellowish red. It is hot and dry in the second degree; three direms taken in water, is diuretic, and also useful in suppression of the menses. It expedites the delivery of the dead f&oelig;tus and of the placenta. Its smell expels mucus from the brain and collections of wind. In those of a hot temperament it produces head-ache. Its corrector is oil of roses, vinegar, or its own oil; the latter is very beneficial both externally and internally used, and possesses all the beneficial properties attributed to the flower. An unguent composed of this, Akirkirrha, and Tokhur Unjeera, applied to the loins, is very beneficial in the <pb id=pb109 n=109>two cases mentioned above, and is used both externally and internally in complaints of the uterus, also in rheumatism.

<p id=p640><ab type=parNum>640</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shutawur</hi> <UR>shtAUr</UR>.&mdash;A name for the root of a tree in the jungles, of a prickly kind; its stem and branches are thin, with many smaller ones, about an inch or two inches long in the intervals. Its leaves are very thin and small, somewhat like the Fir tree. The tree itself grows to the height of 9 or 10 feet; its seed resembles the Anboo Saleb. It is sweet, cool, moist, and heavy; cures disorders of wind, mucus, bile, and blood, also swellings of the body. It is aphrodisiac; increases the secretion of milk, and is an ingredient in celebrated formulæ. For increasing the consistence of semen, and as an aphrodisiac, I have found its conserve and powder of great use. One kind of it is called Kalinta, another Maha Shutawuri; they are cool; cure piles and laxities from indigested food, disorders of the eyes; are cardiac, aphrodisiac, and increase knowledge.

<p id=p641><ab type=parNum>641</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shitawuballie</hi> <UR>shtAUblI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of sugar, which cures eruptions from diffused bile, seminal weakness, delirium, nausea, and thirst.

<p id=p642><ab type=parNum>642</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shereefa</hi> <UR>shryfA</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Seetaphill</hi>. It is sweet and cardiac; increases semen and removes depression of spirits. If the kernel of the seed, in the quantity of one direm, and <hi>dhaie</hi>, half rittal, be bruised together and rubbed over the body, in cures of itch, left to dry, and the same repeated several times, the itch will be cured; this I have found to be the case; tried and found effectual. &ldquo;Annona squamosa.&rdquo;

<p id=p643><ab type=parNum>643</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shuftaloo</hi> <UR>shftAlU</UR>.&mdash;A common fruit of India. Its tree like the Aroo. It is heavy, slow of digestion, cool, but less so than the Aroo; when unripe it is sour. The best is sweet when ripe.

<p id=p644><ab type=parNum>644</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shukur Javan</hi> <UR>shkr jUn</UR>.&mdash;Cool; expels wind; strengthens the system; decreases bile, wind, and mucus. A. <hi>Toorunjabeen</hi>.

<p id=p645><ab type=parNum>645</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shukur Kund</hi> <UR>shkr knd</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Convolvulus Batatas.&rdquo; A common culinary root, sweet and a little hot, and heavy, aphrodisiac, increases semen, and strengthens the brain.

<p id=p646><ab type=parNum>646</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shumie</hi> <UR>shmI</UR>.&mdash;Commonly called Seenkur; cool, light, and soft; cures difficulty of respiration, Juzam, piles, disorders of mucus. The dried fruit increases knowledge, causes bile, and the growth of hair.

<pb id=pb110 n=110><p id=p647><ab type=parNum>647</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shunphopee</hi> <UR>shnpxUpI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of Baer; is emetic, and <corr sic=benefical>beneficial</corr> in disorders of mucus and bile.

<p id=p648><ab type=parNum>648</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shungirf</hi> <UR>shngrf</UR>.&mdash;The red sulphuret of mercury. A. <hi>Shingerf</hi>; sweet and bitter; useful in fever and mucus, also fever from excess of mucus, wind and bile. It is called also <hi>Ingoor</hi>.

<p id=p649><ab type=parNum>649</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sholie</hi> <UR>shUlI</UR>.&mdash;A name for wild turmeric; pungent, sweet, and bitter; increases appetite, but vitiates taste.

<p id=p650><ab type=parNum>650</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shora</hi> <UR>shUr"h</UR>.&mdash;Nitras Potassæ. Nitrate of Potash. <hi>Yavakshara</hi>, S. A. <hi>Ubkur</hi>. Aperient; increases bile. In the Dhara Shekoi, it is said, that one dram of Shora, of the refined sort, pounded and enclosed in two plantains for a night, and given in affections of the spleen and Badgola, and repeated for three or four days, will cure the disease. If bruised and applied to piles, it will remove them. As a refrigerant and diuretic in gonorrh&oelig;a, I have found it very beneficial. It has been given in suppression of urine to the <hi>Emperor Akber</hi>, with great success.

<p id=p651><ab type=parNum>651</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shetoot</hi> <UR>shytUt</UR>.&mdash;A name for the mulberry.

<p id=p652><ab type=parNum>652</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shehut</hi> <UR>shxt</UR>.&mdash;Also Shehud. A. <hi>Assil</hi>, &ldquo;Honey.&rdquo; Vide Yunani works.

<p id=p653><ab type=parNum>653</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sheeta</hi> <UR>shytA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Doob</hi> grass.

<p id=p654><ab type=parNum>654</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sheesha</hi> <UR>shysh"h</UR>.&mdash;Resembling Kaley in properties. A. <hi>Asserab</hi>.

<p id=p655><ab type=parNum>655</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sheeshum</hi> <UR>shyshm</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Seeshum</hi>.

<p id=p656><ab type=parNum>656</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sheobogun</hi> <UR>shyUbxUgxn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Bael</hi>, from the word <hi>Mahadeo</hi>, who is called &ldquo;<hi>Sheo</hi>,&rdquo; and <hi>Bogun</hi>, which signifies &ldquo;ornament.&rdquo;



<div1 id=ain>
<head><UR>`</UR></head>



<p id=p657><ab type=parNum>657</ab> <hi rend=sc>Abbasie</hi> <UR>`bAsI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Mirabilis Jalappa, W. <hi>Gul Abbas</hi>, H. The root is a mild and efficient purgative, equal, if not superior, to the common jalap.&rdquo; A very common shrub, used by Dr. McNabb, as a purgative; its flower is of a red color and very beautiful, and there are some yellow and white, and variegated; it grows about a yard high or even more; its leaves are triangular, and about two inches long. A pickle is made from the root, and the flower is dressed and eaten with meat. The leaves are suppurating. It is generally understood that the <hi>root</hi>, when old, is the <hi>Choobcheenee</hi>, but this is not the case, though it resembles it, or that kind called <hi>Kutai</hi>.


<div1 id=ghain>
<head><UR>gh</UR></head>


<pb id=pb111 n=111><p id=p658><ab type=parNum>658</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghoghaie</hi> <UR>ghUghAI</UR>.&mdash;A bird called in A. <hi>Asphoor</hi>. It resembles the turtle-dove, and derives its name from the great noise it makes. It is also called <hi>Pukherie</hi>, but this is a general name for wild fowl.

<p id=p659><ab type=parNum>659</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gowreh</hi> <UR>ghUr"h</UR>.&mdash;All kinds of green fruit.

<p id=p660><ab type=parNum>660</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghafis</hi> <UR>ghAfs</UR>.&mdash;Hemp; <hi>Agrimony</hi>; deobstruent; dose one miskal.

<p id=p661><ab type=parNum>661</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghar</hi> <UR>ghAr</UR>.&mdash;The laurel; discutient and attenuant; dose half miskal.

<p id=p662><ab type=parNum>662</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghasool</hi> <UR>ghAsUl</UR>.&mdash;Glasswort; Hindooi, <hi>Chook</hi>; P. <hi>Ghasul</hi>; hot and dry; detergent and caustic; dose half direm.

<p id=p663><ab type=parNum>663</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghareekoon</hi> <UR>ghAryqUn</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Agaric</hi>; deobstruent, vermifuge, cathartic; dose one or two danas.

<p id=p664><ab type=parNum>664</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghirb</hi> <UR>ghrb</UR>.&mdash;The mountain pine, drying.


<div1 id=kaf>
<head><UR>k, g</UR></head>


<p id=p665><ab type=parNum>665</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kakjunga</hi> <UR>kA'k jngxA</UR>.&mdash;Cool, but some say hot, and dry in the 2nd degree; it is vermifuge, and useful in an over-loaded stomach, in poisons, mucus, and eruptions from suffusion of bile; also in fevers. It also obtains the name of <hi>Misie</hi>. <hi>Rijel ul Ghorab</hi>, A. <hi>Tokhem Khelal Kheleel</hi>, P.

<p id=p666><ab type=parNum>666</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kans</hi> <UR>kAns</UR>.&mdash;A shrub with a white flower, of a downy kind; cures suppression of urine or dysuria, heat of the body, disorders of blood, bile, and hectic fever.

<p id=p667><ab type=parNum>667</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kakolie</hi> <UR>kAkUlI</UR>.&mdash;Its properties resemble <hi>Jirkakolie</hi>.

<p id=p668><ab type=parNum>668</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kaksaag</hi> <UR>kA'k sAg</UR>.&mdash;Aperient, and promotes appetite; cures disorders of mucus, swellings of the body, and expels wind.

<p id=p669><ab type=parNum>669</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kasmerie</hi> <UR>kAsmyrI</UR> or <hi>Kasmuroo</hi>, or <hi>Kasmurga</hi>, or <hi>Kasheera</hi>. It is hot; heavy; cures fever, pains in the bowels, and its flower is astringent and beneficial in eruptions from diffusion of bile. It is an ingredient in many formulæ. It prevents the approach of old age, strengthens all the animal functions, and is aphrodisiac and diuretic.

<p id=p670><ab type=parNum>670</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kanjee</hi> <UR>kAnjI</UR>.&mdash;Increases the secretion of milk; cures disorders of mucus, wind, and bile. It is the vinegar of Hindostan. It restores prostrated strength from fatigue, removes pains in the bowels and flatulence, and remedies costiveness. The method of preparing it is thus. A little Zeera and Saslie are put on the fire till they produce a smoke, an earthen vessel is then placed over them <pb id=pb112 n=112>in an inverted position to receive the smoke. Then into this is put mustard, salt, adjwain, and <corr sic=cummin>cumin</corr> seed, with warm water; the mouth of the vessel is then tied up in a cloth, and placed in the sun till it becomes sour. In the hot-weather it is quickly prepared; the older it is, the better for medicinal purposes.

<p id=p671><ab type=parNum>671</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gowrohun</hi> <UR>gAUrUjn</UR>.&mdash;A medicine found in the gall-bladder of a cow, and is but seldom met with. It is beneficial in affections of the mesenteric glands of children; in the quantity of two soorkhi it is purgative. It is also beneficial in flatulent swellings. If boiled in water and used for some time, it will cure epilepsy. It is only found in those cows the descendants of those herded by Khrishna.

<p>It is often counterfeited, but the real kind is clearer than the spurious.

<p id=p672><ab type=parNum>672</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kath</hi> <UR>kt"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Acacia Catechu, W. <hi>Kayar</hi>, H. <hi>Khadira</hi>, S. Mimosa Catechu, Woodville.&rdquo; Called also Kuth. It is cool and vermifuge; strengthens the teeth; cures seminal weakness, fever, white leprosy, swellings, eruptions from bile, marasmus, Juzam, and mucous disorders. The gum is sweet and aphrodisiac, and strengthens the system. That made from the pith of the Khaer, is useful in boils and eruptions, affections of the mouth, and disorders of mucus and blood. It also removes ptyalism.

<p id=p673><ab type=parNum>673</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kakra Singie</hi> <UR>kAnkrAsngI</UR>.&mdash;It is crooked like a ram&apos;s horn; small and red, with a tinge of black, and its pod is hollow; it is bitter, astringent, hot, and promotes appetite, and restores the color of the skin changed from foulness of blood; allays vomiting and thirst; cures fever and disorders of mucus, difficulty of breathing, cough, and eructation, also piles and dysentery. It is said to be hot and dry in the 2nd degree. It likewise cures wind and hoarseness, and creates appetite; and it is useful, if retained in the mouth, as a relief to cough from phlegm; a little of it given to children at the breast, mixed with honey, increases their strength and removes emaciation.

<p id=p674><ab type=parNum>674</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kanakutchoo</hi> <UR>kAnAkchU</UR>.&mdash;Brought from Cashmere, and held in great esteem in that country. Its taste is saltish and sweet, and it is used dressed with meat; some call it <hi>Samaroogh</hi>, but the latter is a creeper and does not produce seed. The fruit is about <pb id=pb113 n=113>half the size of an egg, and is suspended from the plant, which is of a white color, and grows during the rains in the jungles, and loves the vicinity of running water. It is also called <hi>Neerkoombie</hi>. It is found sometimes amongst ruins, but those that grow in the jungles are to be preferred. The lower classes of Indians use it as food, and as such it is grateful. It is useful in affections of the eyes.

<p id=p675><ab type=parNum>675</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kagphill</hi> <UR>kAgpxl</UR> or <hi>Kagtoondie</hi>. &ldquo;Strychnos Nux Vomica, W.&rdquo; &ldquo;I have heard that it grows very common about Midnapoor or Cuttack; several seeds or nuts are enclosed in one pod, which in size is about that of a horse <corr sic=chesnut>chestnut</corr>, the seeds are surrounded in the pod by a glutinous matter. It is said to be useful in paralysis, but has seldom been given beyond six grains in the day.&rdquo;&mdash;&ldquo;Trans.&rdquo; It has obtained its name from being poison to the crow. Kag being the name of a crow, and phill, a nut A. <hi>Hubbool Girab</hi>; for the same reason. It is not well ascertained whether it is a seed or root, but it looks like a seed. It is equally uncertain whether it is cool or hot; it is brownish, inside white; it is round, and its shell very hard; steeped in water it becomes soft, and its shell can be removed; it is then rasped down and pounded, and kept in a state of powder or electuary for use. It strengthens the system; cures disorders of wind; blackens white hair; but its constant use produces palsy. It is an active poison; its correctors are drinking fresh milk, producing vomiting, and taking soup, oily or fatty substances<corr sic=",">.</corr> If externally applied to discolorations of the skin, <hi>daad</hi>, pains, &amp;c. it will be found beneficial. It is said in the <hi>Dara Shekoi</hi>, to be excellent in cholics from wind. It is in my opinion hot, but as it is a strong poison, it is better not to use it: if given as a medicine, its correctors ought to be given with it.

<p>It is also mentioned among aphrodisiac medicines, and will be found a powerful one, should it agree with the stomach. In India its name is <hi>Koochela</hi>.

<p id=p676><ab type=parNum>676</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gajur</hi> <UR>gAzr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Daucus Carota, W.&rdquo; The carrot; sweet to the taste, and equally hot and cold in its effects; it creates appetite, produces costiveness, cures eruptions from suffusion of bile; is useful in piles, is lithontriptic, and beneficial in mucous disorders <pb id=pb114 n=114>and wind. A. <hi>Gazur</hi>. I have found it excellent when roasted in an oven; the thin external rind and heart removed, and ate with rose-water, and <hi>Bedemoosk</hi>, in depression of spirits, and as a cardiac. Its distilled water is also equally effectual. Its virtues are described in Yunani works.

<p id=p677><ab type=parNum>677</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kaiphill</hi> <UR>kAI pxl</UR> or <hi>Kutphill</hi>. It is bitter, astringent, and pungent, cures disorders of mucus and wind, fevers, difficulty of breathing, seminal weakness, piles, cough, and all affections of the throat.

<p id=p678><ab type=parNum>678</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kanch</hi> <UR>kAnch</UR> or <hi>Kaatch</hi>; light; reduces corpulence; cures boils and eruptions, and strengthens the eyes. It is also called <hi>Zejage</hi>.

<p id=p679><ab type=parNum>679</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kalizeerie</hi> <UR>kAlI zyrI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Nigella Indica, Roxb. <hi>Musavi</hi>, S. Sp. ch. annual, petals entire, pistils five, length of the stamina, leaves decompound, exterior lip of the nectary ovate, and deeply two-cleft, interior entire and acute. Roxb. MS.&rdquo; A seed of a black color, twice as long as the zeerie, and about twice the breadth; also named <hi>Kurdmana</hi> though improperly. It is used as medicine for horses; it is hot, increases the digestive powers, and is useful in all swellings.

<p id=p680><ab type=parNum>680</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kasht</hi> <UR>kAsht</UR>.&mdash;Very hard. A kind of sugar-cane.

<p id=p681><ab type=parNum>681</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kangeerug</hi> <UR>kngyrUgh</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kakeerun</hi>.

<p id=p682><ab type=parNum>682</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kalseenbie</hi> <UR>kAlsynbI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kalyseeb</hi>; hot and heavy; cures disorders of mucus and bile, also <corr sic=symptoms resp=errata>disorders</corr> in the mouth.

<p id=p683><ab type=parNum>683</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kansi</hi> <UR>kAnsI</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Rooie</hi>; heavy, hot, and aperient; strengthens the eyes and cures bilious and mucous disorders.

<p id=p684><ab type=parNum>684</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kathmanda</hi> <UR>kA'tx"hmndA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Lisanus sowr</hi>.

<p id=p685><ab type=parNum>685</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kalakora</hi> <UR>kAlAkUrA</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A name for <hi>Kirra Inderjow</hi>.

<p id=p686><ab type=parNum>686</ab> <hi rend=sc>Katchloon</hi> <UR>kAchlUn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Muschookoonia</hi>, also named <hi>Kuphaiena</hi>, or <hi>Mylhoolrejaje</hi>. Its taste is rough; increases bile, decreases mucus, and useful in splenitis. It is laxative, removes specs, and opacities of the cornea. It dries the stomach, and externally is useful in all kinds of itch.

<p id=p687><ab type=parNum>687</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kastipadile</hi> <UR>kAsh'tpAdlI</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Padill</hi>.

<p id=p688><ab type=parNum>688</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kalesur</hi> <UR>kAlysr</UR> or <hi>Kulesur</hi>; a plant, its leaves and sprigs very thin and small, it is sold in a dried state. It is like the <hi>Badsingbose</hi>. Its fruit is like the <hi>Baer</hi>, but a little larger, of <pb id=pb115 n=115>a clay color or greenish. It is of two kinds, white and black, both oleaginous and sweet, heavy, increases semen, cures disorders of the three secretions, fevers, disorders of the vagina, dropsy, and it is astringent in its properties. The black kind increases appetite.

<p id=p689><ab type=parNum>689</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kanghi</hi> <UR>kAngxI</UR>.&mdash;Cool, pungent; sweetish to the taste; strengthens the system, clears the color of the skin; is astringent, flatulent; useful in affections of the mouth and hectic fever.

<p id=p690><ab type=parNum>690</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kandagolhi</hi> <UR>kAndAgUlI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of onion, used by the weavers of cloth, from which circumstance it has derived its name (&ldquo;Squills?&rdquo;)<corr>.</corr> It is like the common onion, but four times as large; it grows in the jungles, and in A. is called <hi>Unsul</hi>; its properties are described in Yunani works.

<p id=p691><ab type=parNum>691</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kapoor</hi> <UR>kApUr</UR>.&mdash;Cool, light, anti-aphrodisiac; beneficial in disorders of the eyes; cures heat of the body, bad taste in the mouth; removes corpulence and swellings of the body, disorders from poison, and clears the brain. A. <hi>Kaphoor</hi>. It is of four kinds: <hi>Poonasir</hi>, <hi>Bheemseejnie</hi>, <hi>Saasdaie</hi> and <hi>Bhaskur</hi>, the medicinal properties of all are the same. &ldquo;Laurus Camphora.&rdquo;

<p id=p692><ab type=parNum>692</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kupoor</hi> <UR>kpUr</UR>.&mdash;The same as above; also called <hi>Khesia</hi>.

<p id=p693><ab type=parNum>693</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kapoorbile</hi> <UR>kpUrbylI</UR>.&mdash;A flower; its leaves and root resembling the saffron flower; it is brought from Europe.

<p id=p694><ab type=parNum>694</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goobrowla</hi> <UR>kbrUlA</UR> also <hi>Goobreyla</hi>. A. <hi>Khumfusa</hi>. P. <hi>Jaab</hi>. It is described in all Yunani works.

<p id=p695><ab type=parNum>695</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kapithar Jug</hi> <UR>kpyt hrjUg</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Soorinjan</hi>; pungent, cool, and dry; increases general heat and bile; cures disorders of blood and mucus; also removes <hi>daad</hi>; is vermifuge, and is an antidote to poison.

<p id=p696><ab type=parNum>696</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kupass</hi> <UR>kpAs</UR> or <hi>Kurpass</hi>. &ldquo;Gossypium herbaceum.&rdquo; It is sweet, hot, and light; cures disorders of wind; it is the cotton tree; some call it cool. Its seed increases the secretion of animal milk, removes bile, mucus, heat, thirst, fatigue, epilepsy, &amp;c. The wild species is cool, and increases the acuteness of taste and cures ulcers. It is also called <hi>Karis</hi> or <hi>Karpassie</hi>.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Kupass</hi> is the cotton tree; hot and moist; cures asthma, cough, costiveness; loosens the chest. The cotton burnt and applied to <pb id=pb116 n=116>ulcers, dries them up, blown into the nose stops bleeding; also bleeding of the gums. Should any one have eaten dhatura, and become insensible, four direms of the seeds bruised in water, and given to drink will remove the cause. It is also an antidote to the poison of opium, bhang, snakes, the root of dhatura, scorpions, &amp;c. in the quantity of seven direms.

<p id=p697><ab type=parNum>697</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kubab Cheenee</hi> <UR>kbAb chynI</UR>.&mdash;It is pungent and bitter; promotes digestion; increases appetite; improves the taste; cures affections of wind, phlegm, paralysis of the tongue, and clears the voice. &ldquo;Cubebs, <hi>Piper Cubeba</hi>, Murr.&rdquo; Excellent in gonorrh&oelig;a virulenta.

<p id=p698><ab type=parNum>698</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kapoor Kutcherie</hi> <UR>kpUr kchyrI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Saaltie</hi>.

<p id=p699><ab type=parNum>699</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kapoorie</hi> <UR>kpUrI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Ispurka</hi>.

<p id=p700><ab type=parNum>700</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kuthael</hi> <UR>k'txl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Artocarpus Integrifolia (Roxb.)&rdquo; A fruit of India, very common, of a green color like <hi>Shukena</hi>, from half a yard to a yard in length, and about half a yard in thickness. On opening it is found a pulp of a saffron color, of a mucilaginous nature, inclining to gummy. The tree is like that of the walnut, but I suspect the Kuthael is much the largest and the leaves much less. The smell of the flower is sweet. The fruit is taken from the tree before it is ripe, covered with lime and thus brought to maturity. It cures disorders of bile and wind, strengthens the system, and is aphrodisiac; it cures eruptions from diffused bile, and is slow of digestion; it induces costiveness, is useful in disorders of the chest, increases semen and allays thirst. Its seeds are astringent and sweet, and increase wind, they are hurtful if ate on an empty stomach. Its corrector is its seed. Some have said, that the fruit when allowed to ripen on the tree is the best, and that the forced kind is cool.

<p id=p701><ab type=parNum>701</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kootki</hi> <UR>k'tkI</UR>.&mdash;A small root, &ldquo;Justicia Ganderussa,&rdquo; brought from the hills; it is of a grey colour and full of knots; bitter to the taste, during digestion; pungent, cool, and drying. It is light and aperient; cures bilious, mucous, and feverish disorders, difficulty of breathing, heart-burn, and heat of body. It is also vermifuge; the dose 4 direms.

<p id=p702><ab type=parNum>702</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutara</hi> <UR>ktArA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of sugar-cane; it is thin, cool, and heavy; cures diffusion of bile and <hi>Rajiroge</hi>. The leaves of one <pb id=pb117 n=117>kind are like needles, another much larger, a third of a middling size: all are astringent, and after meals produce heart-burn, and wind; they cure disorders of mucus and bile, but cause heat in the chest and flatulence. Its correction is being boiled in water, or roasted in hot ashes. When washed in water it becomes less flatulent, and cures disordered secretions, increases the bulk of the solids, and is diuretic.

<p id=p703><ab type=parNum>703</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kuteera</hi> <UR>k'tyrA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Echinops echinatus, (Roxb.)&rdquo; The globe-thistle, or <hi>Kuragond</hi>. Cool; increases consistence of semen; beneficial in gonorrh&oelig;a; lessens aphrodisia. If two mashas be infused in water for a night, well mixed and taken with sherbet of <hi>Unjewar</hi>, or by itself, it will be found effectual in vomiting of blood, in gonorrh&oelig;a, and itchiness of the urinary bladder.

<p id=p704><ab type=parNum>704</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutai</hi> <UR>k'tA'yI</UR>.&mdash;The white kind; it is a species of the small <hi>Kutai</hi>; the flower of the large kind is red. The small is bitter and pungent; hot and useful in wind, bile and disorders of the liver, difficulty of voiding urine, in torpor of the olfactory nerves; is vermifuge, and cures affections of the heart. The large kind is called Beretta, already noticed, also called <hi>Kuntai</hi>.

<p id=p705><ab type=parNum>705</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutoonbur</hi> <UR>k'tUnbr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Cucumis Madraspatanas.&rdquo; A kind of <hi>Kutchim</hi> (species of melon); sweet and hot, vide <hi>Baluka</hi>.

<p id=p706><ab type=parNum>706</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutputrie</hi> <UR>k't ptrI</UR>.&mdash;Hot and astringent; useful in disorders of the organs of generation of the female; its fruit cool and aphrodisiac, and produces a discharge of wind.

<p id=p707><ab type=parNum>707</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kuth</hi> <UR>k'tx"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Catechu, Terra Japonica, Acacia Catechu?&rdquo;

<p id=p708><ab type=parNum>708</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutchnar</hi> <UR>kchnAr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Bauhinia variegata.&rdquo; One kind of which is called Gobdar; the leaves of the <hi>Kutchnar</hi> are green and variegated with veins, and they resemble the junction of two leaves, indeed a separation does sometimes exist. The tree resembles the mulberry, and is even larger, but considerably so in diameter; both kinds are cool, astringent; produce costiveness; cure disorders of mucus and bile; are vermifuge; destroy worms in the rectum; useful in the virulent ulcer called Kunzeer, also in all eruptions and boils. Its flower is cool, dry, light, and astringent; cures disorders of bile, and corrects an excess in the menstrual discharge; beneficial in piles, wounds, ulcers, and cough. The tree is called by the above name, but it is usually <pb id=pb118 n=118>given to the flower only. I have found it beneficial to the stomach, in removing laxativeness of the bowels, and in bleeding piles. A decoction of its bark forms an excellent gargle in ptyalism from mercury or bela.

<p id=p709><ab type=parNum>709</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutchaloo</hi> <UR>kchAlU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Arum Colocasia.&rdquo; An esculent root, vide <hi>Aroie</hi>.

<p id=p710><ab type=parNum>710</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gudjpepullie</hi> <UR>gch pyplI</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Gudjpeepul</hi>; a round fruit, 4 times as large as that of the peepul, and very much resembles it; it is bitter, hot; increases appetite; induces costiveness; cures Juzam, difficulty of breathing, affections of the throat, is vermifuge, and useful in disorders of wind and mucus.

<p id=p711><ab type=parNum>711</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutchua</hi> <UR>kchUA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;P. <hi>Sungpoosht</hi> or <hi>Bahá</hi>. A. <hi>Silhafat</hi>.&rdquo; &ldquo;The Turtle.&rdquo; Its meat is moist and aphrodisiac, and is useful in disorders of wind. It is related, that in cases of great difficulty of respiration from affections of the lungs or bronchiæ, much benefit has been derived from inhaling the breath of the turtle. Its eggs, mixed with water and applied hot to the scrotum, removes disorders, to which it may be subjected.

<p id=p712><ab type=parNum>712</ab> <hi rend=sc>Coochilla</hi> <UR>kchylA</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Kagphill</hi>.

<p id=p713><ab type=parNum>713</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutcherie</hi> <UR>kchyrI</UR>.&mdash;(Cucumis Madraspatanas;) sweet, hot, light, and soft; creates appetite; increases bile. It is called <hi>Dustumboieya</hi>, vide <hi>Phoot</hi>. There is another fruit which bears this name, it is a creeper, found in fields, like the <hi>Kunoorie</hi> fruit; it is pungent, bitter; assists digestion, and increases appetite. In my opinion, it is hot; it is eaten cut in half, and fried with salt and oil, and greatly relished. It is thus also rendered more active in its properties. It is used both ripe and unripe; when used with meat, the later is easily rendered tender. It forms an ingredient in all stomachic powders in India.

<p id=p714><ab type=parNum>714</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kutchoor</hi> <UR>kchUr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Curcuma Zerumbet, (Roxb.)&rdquo; Of three kinds: large, male, and female. The large kind is also called <hi>Nerkuchoor</hi>, and the simple word <hi>Kutchoor</hi> is generally applied to the female; the third kind is called <hi>Kaphoor Kutcherie</hi>. The <hi>Nerkutchoor</hi> is also called <hi>Zerambeed</hi>. The three kinds possess nearly the same properties. It is hot, light; creates appetite; cures Juzam, piles, boils, wounds, difficulty of breathing, Badgola, disorders of wind, and mucus, and is vermifuge.

<pb id=pb119 n=119><p id=p715><ab type=parNum>715</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kudum</hi> <UR>kdm</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Nauclea Orientalis, or <hi>Kudum</hi>, and another kind called <hi>Mohoonut</hi>; also one kind named <hi>Dhoul Kudum</hi>, and <hi>Bhoom Kudum</hi>.&rdquo; The leaves and flower resemble the walnut tree; all kinds are cool, and are useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood.

<p id=p716><ab type=parNum>716</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gudha</hi> <UR>gd-hA</UR>.&mdash;Its flesh is sweet, during digestion bitter. It is light, strengthens the system, and increases bile and mucus.

<p id=p717><ab type=parNum>717</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gudloon</hi> <UR>gdlUn</UR>.&mdash;Hot, light; cures disorders of wind and mucus. Is aperient and diuretic.

<p id=p718><ab type=parNum>718</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goodhul</hi> <UR>gd-hl</UR> <hi>Citron</hi>.&mdash;Has a flower like the poppy, and many leaves; its leaves are like the mulberry, and it flowers every alternate year. Its fruit is like the apple; when unripe, green, and acid, with a little bitterness; but when fully ripe, and it has become yellow, the bitterness does not remain; it also becomes red and sweet, but if it remain long on the tree it again assumes a greenish hue. The tree is like the lime tree with broad leaves. The people of India have an idea, that if the flowers be kept in the house they produce quarrelling and strife; the flowers are used in lowness of spirits arising from heat. It is said, that the root of this and also that of the <hi>Kunaer</hi> are very intoxicating. If boiled in milk, and this curdled, it is aphrodisiac.

<p id=p719><ab type=parNum>719</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurna</hi> <UR>krnA</UR>.&mdash;The flower of the above; it has four leaves, and is white before it opens; it is shaped like an arrow-head; it has a sweet perfume, and as such is used; a distilled water is also made from it and an essential oil. The water is called Arukbahar, and is hot and dry, and used in weakness of the brain; also as an aphrodisiac; creating appetite and elevating the spirits; also in pains of the chest, in cholics from wind, and delirium.

<p>A little of it commenced with and constantly used for seven days, with a little sugar, is beneficial in affections of the spleen; it is used in Aniseed water as a lithontriptic; in an empty stomach for the bleeding piles. It is used with musk, &amp;c. to perfume hooka snakes. The author of the Topha says, that this is the bud of the Naringi, and that the distilled water of that is called <corr sic=Arukbuhar>Arukbahar</corr>; but in my opinion they are distinct varieties, and in this part of the country they distil from all. <hi>Goodhul</hi> is the name of the tree, <hi>Kuth</hi> that of the fruit, and <hi>Kurna</hi> that of the flower.

<pb id=pb120 n=120><p id=p720><ab type=parNum>720</ab> <hi rend=sc>Karownda</hi> <UR>krUndA</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Kirmidie</hi>, and a kind of this <hi>Khristnphill</hi>; the first kind is red and white, second is white and black, and the third entirely black, therefore called <hi>Kristnphil</hi>, from being of the color of the god Kristna. Its flower is like the Jui; when unripe it is hot, heavy, and acid; produces mucus and diffusion of bile: when ripe it is sweet and less acid, light; creates appetite, and cures disorders of wind and bile. &ldquo;Carissa Carandas.&rdquo;

<p id=p721><ab type=parNum>721</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kareyl</hi> <UR>kryl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Capparis, the Caper plant,&rdquo; or <hi>Kareyr</hi>. A tree without leaves, its branches rise from the root, and are very numerous. It grows about the height of the <hi>Baer</hi>. It has numerous flowers, small and three-leaved. Its flowers are boiled and eaten; its fruit made into pickles in salt-water and oil; its fruit is at first green, then it becomes red, and lastly black; they are about the size of the Karownda; they are bitter, pungent, hot, aperient; useful in mucous disorders, wind, boils, eruptions, swellings, as an antidote to poisons, and in piles. Its flowers are beneficial in disorders of mucus and bile. My father always recommended them in disorders arising from cold. In consequence of their heating quality, they are useful in affections of the joints. P. <hi>Amghyllyan</hi>.

<p id=p722><ab type=parNum>722</ab> <hi rend=sc>Karunj</hi> <UR>krnj</UR>.&mdash;From the &ldquo;<hi>Moojerrabad Akberi</hi>.&rdquo; The name of a large tree, the leaves like the lime tree, the fruit like the tamarind, but smaller; it is hot, and discusses swellings and all pains arising from cold; useful in lumbago, in strokes of the wind, and it is used as a fomentation in the above disorders.

<p id=p723><ab type=parNum>723</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gurehri</hi> <UR>kr-hyrI</UR>.&mdash;A fruit of India, produced in the hot season; it is a nut of a black color, and shining appearance, about the length of the <hi>Jamalgota</hi>, but a little thinner; the kernel is white, and is ate with salt and <hi>peepul</hi>, and much esteemed. It induces costiveness, is aphrodisiac, and thickens semen.

<p id=p724><ab type=parNum>724</ab> <hi rend=sc>Krishndaan</hi> <UR>krshn dAn</UR>.&mdash;A kind of rice; in its properties and excellence like the <hi>Saatie</hi>.

<p id=p725><ab type=parNum>725</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurwanuk</hi> <UR>krUAnk</UR>.&mdash;The name of a common bird; its meat is sweet and pleasant to the taste. It frequents the banks of rivers and jungles, but the river kind is nearly twice the size of the other.

<pb id=pb121 n=121><p id=p726><ab type=parNum>726</ab> <hi rend=sc>Geerguth</hi> <UR>kyrg'tx"h</UR>.&mdash;(Chameleon.) A. <hi>Heerbah</hi>, Un. <hi>Kalamunder</hi>, P. <hi>Aftabperust</hi>. It resembles the lizard in its appearance. It has a long tail, and frequently changes its color.

<p id=p727><ab type=parNum>727</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurkura</hi> <UR>krkrA</UR>.&mdash;(Ardea Virgo.) A species of paddy-bird, called also <hi>Kurkhuraa</hi>; its flesh increases corpulency; is aphrodisiac, and strengthens the system.

<p id=p728><ab type=parNum>728</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurinjua</hi> <UR>krnjUA</UR> or <hi>Korinjeka</hi>, or <hi>Kurinjee</hi>. &ldquo;Guilandina Bonduccella, Linn. Cæsalpinia Bonduccella. Roxb. <hi>Kutkuleja</hi>, H. An excellent tonic, and infallible in the cure of intermittents, when combined with a decoction of <hi>Chereyta</hi>. Dose one seed, mixed with pepper, which may be repeated every three hours.&rdquo; A seed, or rather nut, hard and shining; it is of a blue or greenish color; light, round, and thick, like the <hi>Majoo</hi>; when shaken near the ear the kernel is found loose, and when broken, this is found whitish, like the <hi>Mukhana</hi>. Its shrub grows to the height of a man, more or less, &ldquo;but if supported, will run much higher. It is covered with very sharp prickles, and makes the best fence in the world perhaps.&rdquo; It is hot; cures piles; is vermifuge, useful in Juzam, and its leaves are beneficial in disorders of wind, mucus, and blood. A. <hi>Ektumkut</hi>. P. <hi>Khayeblees</hi>. Leaves used as a fomentation in rheumatic pains.

<p id=p729><ab type=parNum>729</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurwara</hi> <UR>k'rUA'rA</UR> or <hi>Kurwala</hi>. A name for <hi>Amultas</hi>; P. <hi>Phuloos</hi>. A. <hi>Khiarshimber</hi>. Discutient, aperient, and laxative. See Yunani works.

<p id=p730><ab type=parNum>730</ab> <hi rend=sc>Korund</hi> <UR>kUrnd</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Sunadudje</hi>.

<p id=p731><ab type=parNum>731</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goor</hi> <UR>gU'r</UR>.&mdash;It is sweet to the taste and a little pungent; light, aperient; creates appetite; increases bile and swellings of the body; produces worms and cures disorders of wind; strengthens the system; is diuretic and cardiac. P. <hi>Kund Sia</hi>.

<p id=p732><ab type=parNum>732</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurr</hi> <UR>kr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Carthamus Tinctoria.</hi>&rdquo; A name of <hi>Masphir</hi> or <hi>Kussumb</hi>. P. <hi>Kussukdana</hi>. A. <hi>Koortub</hi>. It is of a white color like peas, and a little pointed; it is very common; removes phlegm, and is aperient.

<p id=p733><ab type=parNum>733</ab> <hi rend=sc>Karela</hi> <UR>krylA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Momordica Charantia.&rdquo; A common culinary fruit, of a green or yellowish color, and encloses numerous seeds. It is about two or three inches long, and very irregular in the surface. It is in its properties cool and light; some say <pb id=pb122 n=122>hot and heavy, and some call it equal. It is pungent and laxative; beneficial in piles, eruptions of the mouth, disorders of the blood, jaundice, panroque, phlegm, seminal weakness, and it is vermifuge. Its name is said to be Kassaul hemar. In my opinion it is very drying, by reason of its heating quality: when dressed with onions, it is less heavy as food. It has the effect of strengthening the stomach weakened from cold. Its root taken, commencing with one masha and increasing to seven, will cure the venereal disease. The wild kind is named Kaarbellie. It is cool, bitter, light, and aperient; cures disorders of bile, blood, phlegm, black bile, jaundice, wind, marasmus, seminal weakness, and worms. Another kind of this produced in gardens is of a white color, and more long than the other; its coat is thin, and it is the best of all the varieties: there are many ways of dressing it, but with onions it is the best and most aphrodisiac; without onions, its effects are not so powerful, and it is less heating.

<p id=p734><ab type=parNum>734</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kirkund</hi> <UR>krqnd</UR>.&mdash;The small Baer, called also Nazookbadun; it is moist and heavy; sweet, and cures disorders of bile and wind. It is also called Jhirberrie. There is a smaller kind, that is more sweet, and grows in gardens.

<p id=p735><ab type=parNum>735</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kora</hi> <UR>krA</UR>.&mdash;A name for the <hi>Inderjow</hi> tree; it is very bitter and astringent; cool and dry; creates appetite; cures bilious disorders and foulness of blood, also disorders of mucus; and removes obstructions in the pylorus from viscid mucus; useful in indigestion and Juzam; restrains hemorrhage from piles and diarrh&oelig;a.

<p id=p736><ab type=parNum>736</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurni</hi> <UR>krnI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Mimusops Kauki.&rdquo; A fruit of the hills; pungently bitter and hot; cures disorders of bile and mucus, flatulence, and is vermifuge.

<p id=p737><ab type=parNum>737</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kurrukphill</hi> <UR>kr'k p-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Bahira</hi>.

<p id=p738><ab type=parNum>738</ab> <hi rend=sc>Krishn Moolie</hi> <UR>krshn mUlI</UR>.&mdash;A black kind called <hi>Kalesur</hi>; it derives <corr sic=it>its</corr> name from being a root of the color of <hi>Krishna</hi>.

<p id=p739><ab type=parNum>739</ab> <hi rend=sc>Krishn Saarba</hi> <UR>krshn sArbA</UR>.&mdash;A black kind of <hi>Saarba</hi>.

<p id=p740><ab type=parNum>740</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kussowndie</hi> <UR>ksUndI</UR> or <hi>Kussownda</hi>. The name of a tree of India; its branches commence from near the root and surround the stem, growing out from all sides of it. It grows about the thickness of a bambu, and in height that of a man. The leaves <pb id=pb123 n=123>if rubbed have a disagreeable smell. Its seed-vessel is about a yard long, or even longer; it encloses small round seeds like <hi>Sumach</hi>, a little crooked. Its leaves are thick like <hi>Kumerach</hi>, but the latter are broad, whereas this is longer. The large kind is called <hi>Kussownda</hi>, the smaller <hi>Kussowndie</hi>; the leaves of both are nearly alike. It is hot, moist, and some say equal. It relieves the brain, and if the seed is washed and eaten, it will cure the effects of the scorpion&apos;s poison; and if the seed and leaves be ground in a mill, made into bread with flour, and eaten with sweet oil, it will cure night blindness; should any one have swallowed tiger&apos;s hair, pills made of the leaves, flower, and seed swallowed and vomiting produced, the hair will be discharged.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Kussowndie</hi> is a medicine of India, hot and dry; cures wind and loosens phlegm; useful in cough and disorders of the blood. 1&frac12; direms of its root with half direm of peepul eaten, will cure the poison of snakes or scorpions, or if rubbed on the bitten or stung part will give relief. It clears the voice, and if five direms of its leaves with one direm of peepul be bruised in water, and taken for seven days, during which period food without salt is eaten, it will cure Lues Venerea.

<p id=p741><ab type=parNum>741</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kusseroo</hi> <UR>ksyrU</UR> or <hi>Kusseruk</hi>. &ldquo;Cyperus Tuberosus.&rdquo; The root of a grass, black and full of hair, like bristles, found in the cold season. It is cool, sweet, heavy; used in disorders of bile, blood, and general heat; it induces costiveness, increases semen, phlegm, and wind, and allays thirst. If eaten with its outer rind, or only chewed, and the juice swallowed, it will be less heavy and hurtful; some bruise it and drink sherbet thus made with sugar, and it is thus more cooling and useful in cases of gonorrh&oelig;a, and the effects of hot winds, but in this case the outer rind must be removed.

<p id=p742><ab type=parNum>742</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kustooryea Mirg</hi> <UR>kstUrI mrg</UR>.&mdash;Its meat is sweet to the taste, light and flatulent, creating appetite; that of the female is cool: useful in fever, cough, disorders of blood, and difficulty of breathing. It is said to be common in Thibet and Bengal. It resembles the deer, and has two ridges on its back lengthways. Musk is procured from its abdomen in this manner: When it is ripe, <pb id=pb124 n=124>it produces itching about the navel, and the animal rubbing it on sharp pointed stones, causes it to discharge in the form of matter. This is the finest and best kind of musk, and the gentleman, with whom I was, received some of it every two years, from the <hi>Rajah</hi> of <hi>Shirinaghur</hi>.

<p id=p743><ab type=parNum>743</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kussoombh</hi> <UR>kUsnb-h"h</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Masphir</hi>. &ldquo;Artemisia Abrotanum.&rdquo; It is sweet, and very hot, and dry; light, and increases bile; cures disorders of blood, mucus, and suppression of urine.

<p id=p744><ab type=parNum>744</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kustoorie</hi> <UR>kstUrI</UR>.&mdash;Bitter, hot, heavy, aphrodisiac; useful in colds, disorders of phlegm and wind; allays vomiting; removes swellings; corrects offensive breath and loss of smell. One kind of it is called <hi>Lutta Kustoorie</hi>, vide L.

<p id=p745><ab type=parNum>745</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kussees</hi> <UR>ksys</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Sulphas Ferri.&rdquo; A kind of <hi>Zaaj</hi>; astringent, cool; increases eye-sight, and clears the skin; vermifuge and an antidote to poisons; also a kind called <hi>Heera Roopus</hi>.

<p id=p746><ab type=parNum>746</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kukrownela</hi> <UR>k-krUnylA</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Kurrownda</hi>.

<p id=p747><ab type=parNum>747</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kukora</hi> <corr sic="<URA>kqrUrA</URA>" resp=errata><UR>k-kUrA</UR></corr>.&mdash;The fruit of a shrub of India, smaller than the Kurela; it has many hair-like fibres of a green colour over its surface, and it has numerous seeds. Its properties are the same as the <hi>Kurela</hi>. It is useful in that eruption which takes place on the face in puberty; beneficial in fever and phlegm, and creates appetite. One kind of it is called <hi>Banje Kakora</hi>. It is bitter, an antidote to poisons; useful in that eruption of the face called acne punctata. Its root is used in Zaerbad, in discussing swellings, and in the bites of all noxious reptiles, and it is also of benefit in cough. Some have said, that this is the wild <hi>Kurela</hi>, but this is not the fact, for the wild <hi>Kurela</hi> is essentially different and more resembles the garden sort.

<p id=p748><ab type=parNum>748</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kookra</hi> <UR>kUk'rA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Wild fowl.&rdquo; P. <hi>Deek</hi>. It is hot, moist, heavy, aphrodisiac; used in disorders of wind; is tonic; produces semen and increases mucus. Its flesh is astringent to the taste; dry and heavy; and those found near rivers are hot and aphrodisiac, and increase mucus.

<p id=p749><ab type=parNum>749</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kookrie</hi> <UR>kUk'ry</UR>.&mdash;The female of the above. A. <hi>Dejaje</hi>: the properties the same.

<p id=p750><ab type=parNum>750</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kukrie</hi> <UR>k-k'rI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Cucumis Utilissimus.&rdquo; Unripe, it is sweet <pb id=pb125 n=125>and cool, heavy, cardiac, and astringent. In my opinion it is aperient, creates appetite, and removes bilious disorders.

<p id=p751><ab type=parNum>751</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gugundool</hi> <UR>g-gn dUl</UR>.&mdash;The best kind of this is the <hi>Kumbi</hi>; it is eaten wasted in <hi>ghee</hi>, with salt and condiments.

<p id=p752><ab type=parNum>752</ab> <hi rend=sc>Googeerun</hi> <UR>gUgyrn</UR> or <hi>Gugeeroo</hi>. A plant from 1 to 1&frac12; yards high; the branches very thin, the leaves like the Nirkut; it is purgative, and when ripe, it is heavy; recommended in wind, blood, and affections of mouth.

<p id=p753><ab type=parNum>753</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kukrownda</hi> <UR>k-krUndA</UR>.&mdash;The common <hi>Kurrownda</hi>. The plant is half a yard or more in height, its leaves like the tobacco; but smaller. It has an offensive smell, much increased by being rubbed betwixt the finger; it grows near ruins or in waste places, and is found in the rains. It is a kind of <hi>Bhangra</hi>, and has the name of <hi>Kokurbangra</hi>; it is bitter, pungent; useful in fevers and disorders of the blood and mucus. If bruised in water, and the water given as a clyster to children, it will remove ascarides, and if three drops be dropped into each ear, it will cure intermittents. It is very beneficial in bleeding piles, both internally and externally. If one direm of the leaves be taken in water, and the bruised leaves applied to the piles, it will effect a cure.

<p id=p754><ab type=parNum>754</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gillo</hi> <UR>gylU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Menispermum Glabrum,<corr>&rdquo;</corr> (vide <hi>Goorcha</hi>,) or <hi>Vaoutvellee</hi> or <hi>Imrutlutta</hi>, or <hi>Jurnasnie</hi>, (a febrifuge,) or <hi>Goorajie</hi>, or <hi>Goondunie</hi>. It is bitter, astringent, and sweet, and in digestion hot, light; inducing costiveness; tonic; increases appetite; beneficial in jaundice and Juzam; also in acne, cracks in the skin, nausea, fevers, and bilious disorders. It forms an ingredient in all favorite formulæ. It has been said to be cold. In my opinion it is either, according as it is prescribed with other medicines. I have given it in continued fever, in the quantity of one direm, cut small and infused in water for a night, with great success. The Hindoos give a decoction of it in fevers. I have given it in various ways in gonorrh&oelig;a, as a tonic, an aphrodisiac, &amp;c. Take of Bunslochun and Sut Gillo, each one masha, mix and give in intermittents, or with cardamoms. My father used it in pills made up with conserve of roses, with great efficacy, in fevers of the continued kind; also with the whey of <hi>Kasni</hi>. <pb id=pb126 n=126>Its powder is likewise used with tin in gonorrh&oelig;a, but I have written more of this in my other works. To make refined or <hi>Sut Gillo</hi>&mdash;

<p>Take the <hi>Gillo</hi>, cut it in small pieces, and squeeze out the juice into a vessel, then add plain water, and strongly mix them together, let them remain thus for 24 hours, then throw away the clear water, and dry the precipitate for use.

<p id=p755><ab type=parNum>755</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gulhar</hi> <UR>glxAr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Nymphea Nilambo</hi>, Linn. Nilumbium Speciosum, W.&rdquo; The flower of the <hi>Kawul</hi> (<hi>Lotus</hi>). It is cool, dry, heavy, and astringent, and shuts up the chest. The centre of the flower, or yellow fructification, is called <hi>Kesur</hi>, or <hi>Kinjeluk</hi>; it is cool; induces costiveness; useful in bleeding piles; also in disorders of bile and mucus. Its seed is usually called <hi>Kawulgutta</hi>; they are produced in the hot season; they are sweet, cool; beneficial in bilious disorders, foulness of blood, general heat, and increase mucus and wind. I have given them in the diarrh&oelig;a of infants, mixed with the water which they drank, with great benefit. The green part of the seed bruised in water, I have also given to children with great good effect in wind and diarrh&oelig;a. It is likewise given in eruptions of the mouth. The stem of the flower and root are cool and dry; aphrodisiac, astringent, and cure disorders of bile, blood, and general heat. The flowers are of two kinds: one opens to the sun, and accompanies him round as he moves, and shuts its leaves when he disappears; this is white, with a red tinge, six-leaved, the yellow centre fructification, in the shape of an inverted cone. Its seed is sweet and cool; clears the complexion; of use in disorders of mucus, bile, blood, thirst, general heat, Juzam, and blisters. It is an antidote to poisons, and beneficial in acne of all kinds.

<p>The other kind has four leaves, of a white color, opens to the moon, and accompanies her, in progress, as the other does the sun; but does not shut on her disappearance. The red and blue kinds, if they have any degree of whiteness, are called <hi>Komode</hi> or <hi>Komoodutti</hi>; these names are in allusion to their property of flowering by the moon&apos;s influence, but they are more seldom met with. The blue is called also <hi>Neeloofir</hi>.

<pb id=pb127 n=127><p id=p756><ab type=parNum>756</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goolkhairoo</hi> <UR>glkhyrU</UR>.&mdash;The marsh-mallow, or rather the mallow.

<p id=p757><ab type=parNum>757</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kulumbuk</hi> <UR>klnbk</UR>.&mdash;A tree of a heavy texture, much veined; it is commonly called <hi>Mulugeer</hi>, but this name is also applied to some kinds of lime.

<p id=p758><ab type=parNum>758</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kooleejan</hi> <UR>klyjAn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Piper Betel.</hi>&rdquo; The best kind is red, thick, and full of knots. It is hot and dry in the 2nd degree; it is cardiac; cures cholicks, pains in the kidnies; increases the strength of the digestive organs, useful in rheumatism of the joints, decreases the flow of urine; beneficial in epilepsy, headache; is aphrodisiac; and is proper for those having a superabundance of mucus. A little kept in the mouth will cure paralysis of the tongue; it clears the voice, and in the quantity of one direm with cow&apos;s milk taken, fasting, it is highly tonic and aphrodisiac. Its corrector is any oily substance or <hi>Kuteera</hi> (a gum).

<p id=p759><ab type=parNum>759</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koolunta</hi> <UR>kln'tA</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A kind of <hi>Satawur</hi>.

<p id=p760><ab type=parNum>760</ab> <hi rend=sc>Keloondha</hi> <UR>klUnd-hA</UR>.&mdash;A name for the fruit of the <hi>Mowa</hi> tree.

<p id=p761><ab type=parNum>761</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kulownjee</hi> <UR>klUnjI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Siadana</hi>; expels wind and flatulence.

<p id=p762><ab type=parNum>762</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kumode</hi> <UR>kmUd</UR> or <hi>Komoodutti</hi>, a kind of <hi>Gulhar</hi>. &ldquo;Rottlera tinctoria.&rdquo;

<p id=p763><ab type=parNum>763</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kumruk</hi> <UR>kmr'k</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Averrhoa Carambola</hi>,&rdquo; or <hi>Kumruka</hi>. A large tree, with many pointed leaves, which when full grown are longer than the <hi>Singtirra</hi> leaf, of a green color and soft texture. The fruit is common and three-cornered; they are of an acid sweetness, and produced in the cold season, and make delicious sherbet; cool, astringent; useful in bile and wind, also in disorders of phlegm. From their acidity, the fruit are injurious to the tongue. This may be corrected by eating them with salt or lime<corr sic=", also" resp=errata>.</corr>

<p id=p764><ab type=parNum>764</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gumbhar</hi> <UR>gmb-hAr</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, hot, heavy, and produces wind; useful in disorders of bile, blood, and pains in the bowels, and induces costiveness. Its fruit is heavy and tonic; clears the hair of the head; increases seminal secretion; cures disorders of bile, wind, hectic fever, thirst, and foulness of the blood; is diuretic, and forms an ingredient in all famous prescriptions: called also <hi>Gumbharie</hi> or <hi>Gumbheer</hi>.

<pb id=pb128 n=128><p id=p765><ab type=parNum>765</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kawul</hi> <UR>knUl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Nymphæa Nelumbo.&rdquo; A name of <hi>Gulhar</hi>.

<p id=p766><ab type=parNum>766</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kawulguth</hi> <UR>knUl g't-h"h</UR>.&mdash;The seed of the <hi>Gulhar</hi>.

<p id=p767><ab type=parNum>767</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kowla</hi> <UR>knUlA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of orange, less strong, and of weaker properties than the <hi>Sangtirra</hi>; but in other respects the same; from its acid it removes stagnation of bile, and is useful in cough and asthma.

<p id=p768><ab type=parNum>768</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goond</hi> <UR>kUnd</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Jasminum grandiflorum?</hi>&rdquo; The wild <hi>Raibile</hi>; the flower cool and light; used in disorders of bile and mucus, and in head-aches; an antidote to poisons, and communicates its perfume to any article from which oil is to be extracted, and gives the oil the quality of strengthening the brain, and of being useful in affections from cold. In my opinion, the flower is hot, as is also oil impregnated with its odour. If it is mixed or rubbed with oil, and used as an unguent in itch, it is equally effectual as the Chumbeley.

<p id=p769><ab type=parNum>769</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gunyar</hi> <UR>knyAr</UR>.&mdash;A flower of India, possessing tonic properties; it strengthens the stomach; used in the cure of Juzam, boils, eruptions, disorders of the blood, swellings, and in cleansing ulcers.

<p id=p770><ab type=parNum>770</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kunkole</hi> <UR>knkUl</UR>.&mdash;A seed resembling <hi>Peepul</hi>, only a little larger; it creates appetite; is hot; useful in affections of the heart, affections of wind and mucus.

<p id=p771><ab type=parNum>771</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koontukphill</hi> <UR>kn'tk p-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Lukudj</hi>, or <hi>Burhael</hi>; it is also called <hi>Kuntukanta</hi>, from its being very prickly.

<p id=p772><ab type=parNum>772</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kundurdolie</hi> <UR>kn'dr'dlI</UR>.&mdash;The name of a plant, cool, light and astringent; useful in heat, feverishness, thirst, disorders of mucus, blood and bile, Juzam, and fever. It also softens iron.

<p id=p773><ab type=parNum>773</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koondoorie</hi> <UR>kn'dUrI</UR>.&mdash;A fruit like the <hi>Pulwull</hi>, of an oval shape. It is acid, grows as a creeper, and used as a culinary vegetable; useful in bilious disorders, foulness of blood, and general heat. Is emetic, and reduces corpulency. Induces costiveness, flatulence, and wind; also aphrodisiac. It is bitter, pungent; removes phlegm, and is an antidote to poisons. In my opinion, it is cool and moist, aperient; weakens the stomach, promotes absorption by increasing the tone of the absorbents, and expedites digestion.

<p id=p774><ab type=parNum>774</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kungni</hi> <UR>kngnI</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Kawurs</hi>, <hi>Sheerazee Kaal</hi>. Cool and <pb id=pb129 n=129>bitter, dry and astringent, yet diuretic; but if boiled in milk, its drying quality will be corrected. It is very generally used as food. It increases the viscidity of mucus, and promotes a disposition to gravel. Its corrector is sugar. It is hurtful to the lungs; but here its corrector is Mustaghi. In its general properties, it comes near the <hi>Cheena</hi>; externally applied hot, it removes rheumatic pains. &ldquo;<hi>Panicum Italicum.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p775><ab type=parNum>775</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gundheel</hi> <UR>gnd-hyl</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Azkhir</hi>, and some kinds called <hi>Mirchiakund</hi>. This is a common plant, about a yard high; its flowers sweet-scented: the properties of all are, I fancy, the same. It is astringent to the taste, and bitter during digestion; hot, useful in affections of the throat and heart, disorders of bile, blood, mucus, difficulty of breathing, cough, and fever.

<p id=p776><ab type=parNum>776</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goondur</hi> <UR>gndr</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Loonia</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p777><ab type=parNum>777</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kunaer</hi> <UR>knAyr</UR> or <hi>Kurneer</hi>. It is of two kinds, the white called <hi>Kurbaer</hi>, and the red <hi>Ruketphup</hi>. The plant grows to the height of a man; its branches numerous, and growing from near the root; its leaves long as the bambu leaf and thicker, green and finely veined. It is hot and light; decreases eye-sight, useful in Juzam, boils and eruptions, acne, itch; is vermifuge, and may be ranked among the poisons. Its flowers kept in the house produce strife. The root and its bark is used as an application in cures of deficient aphrodisiac power. A. <hi>Dufflie</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Nerium Odorum.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p778><ab type=parNum>778</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koonja</hi> <UR>kUnjA</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Goonchee</hi>.

<p id=p779><ab type=parNum>779</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kumbeela</hi> <UR>knbylA</UR>.&mdash;Bitter, laxative, and hot; used in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood; is lithontriptic and vermifuge; cures Badgola, dropsy, and boils; its green leaves are cool and astringent to the stomach; it is called also <hi>Kumbeel</hi>.

<p id=p780><ab type=parNum>780</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gunduk</hi> <UR>gnd'k</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Live Sulphur.&rdquo; In digestion it is bitter and hot, also soft; beneficial in Juzam, affections of the spleen, disorders of mucus and wind, and increases bile. It is an ingredient in many favorite prescriptions. A. <hi>Ribreet</hi>. Its aruk is excellent as an application in itch, and as a tonic is pungently acid and hurtful to the teeth; indeed so very acid is it, that it dissolves shells, and is called <hi>Tezab</hi>; but though acid, it is aphrodisiac.


<pb id=pb130 n=130><p rend="align(center)"><hi>To make Tezab</hi> (Sulphuric Acid).

<p>Take a China cup, and make in it three holes, to suspend it (by a wire of zinc); place a lamp on a low triangle (tripod), and fill the lamp with sulphur; and making several wicks, mix them with the sulphur, and set fire to them; place the China cup under the tripod, and the aruk will come over into it by drops. Care must be taken to admit no wind; when this is lighted the smoke destroys cloth. I have written of the properties of this more at large in my other works.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>The properties of Sulphuric Acid.</hi>

<p>It is hot, creates appetite, expels wind, strengthens the stomach, loins, and back. It is aphrodisiac, useful in disorders of mucus and blood, in paralysis, convulsions, and pains in the stomach, and discusses enlargement of the spleen, if taken to the quantity of from one to four soorkhs in water. It will cure tooth-ache if applied to the hollow of the tooth, but care must be taken that it <corr sic=do>does</corr> not come in contact with a sound tooth. It cures all kinds of Psora, whether dry or moist, applied by itself or in ointment. Taken internally with oil of roses, it loosens phlegm; applied to the white spots of leprosy, it will remove them. If nutmegs, cinnamon, and cloves be moistened with it, and dried, they will become powerful condiments.

<p id=p781><ab type=parNum>781</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kunoocha</hi> <UR>knUchA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mirve</hi>.

<p id=p782><ab type=parNum>782</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gundhur</hi> <UR>gnd-hr</UR>.&mdash;A name for culinary greens&mdash;see <hi>Chowlai</hi>.

<p id=p783><ab type=parNum>783</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gundhka</hi> <UR>gnd-hkA</UR>.&mdash;A title of <hi>Mudukpurnie</hi>; it derives its name from the property of preserving the hair.

<p id=p784><ab type=parNum>784</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kunghi</hi> <UR>kng-hI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Malva Sylvestris.&mdash;(The Mallow) vide <hi>Goolkhairoo</hi>. The mallow, emollient and demulcent, Althæa officinalis.&rdquo; The name of a flower-stem of India, about a man&apos;s height, more or less. Its leaves are round, smooth, serrated, and pointed. It is of two kinds, a small and larger, the leaves large and small accordingly. It has a small yellow flower; inside the seed vessel are many divisions, in which the seeds are contained. It is very useful in piles.

<p>A man had the bleeding piles to an annoying degree of severity. A physician advised him to eat some of the leaves of this, bruised, and made up with pepper into pills; he made up <pb id=pb131 n=131>large pills or balls, and eat them as directed, and was cured in a few days. If the fresh leaves are used, they should be mixed with water and drank; if the dried leaves are preferred, they should be made into pills. It is mucilaginous and demulcent.

<p id=p785><ab type=parNum>785</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gooroochna</hi> <UR>gUrUchnA</UR>.&mdash;or <hi>Gooroochun</hi>. A stone, of a yellow color, on which grass or moss grows; it is astringent and cool, beneficial in possession, and whoever keeps it by them, will escape the influence of all evils; it is useful in disorders of blood, and prevents abortion by its tonic property in giving strength to the uterus. It is the name for <hi>Huzerool bukur</hi>.

<p id=p786><ab type=parNum>786</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goorcha</hi> <UR>gU'rchA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Menispermum cordifolium, W. <hi>Guduchi</hi>, S. <hi>Citamerdu</hi>, Van Rheede, H. M. vii. 39. <hi>Menispermum Verrucosum</hi>, Roxb. MS. <hi>Putra Waly</hi>. Jao. <hi>Funis Felleus</hi>, Rumph. Amb. v. 82. Sp. ch. perennial, scandent, verrucose, leaves cordate, acuminate, entire, smooth, male racemes from the naked branches simple, nectareal scales inserted in the filaments. Every part of this plant exceedingly bitter; used for the cure of intermittents; it is said by Captain Wright, to be as powerful a febrifuge as the Peruvian Bark. V. <hi>Gillo</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p787><ab type=parNum>787</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gowrdun</hi> <UR>gUrdn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Koocha</hi>, called also <hi>Sutpootrie</hi>. It is the name of the <hi>Kooza</hi> flower, red with a yellow fructification in the centre. It has a fine perfume, and a distilled water is made from it; it is a cinquefoil. One kind of it is the <hi>Goolseutie</hi>, P. <hi>Aussureen</hi>. This is white, but a third kind is also red. All three are cool, light, and aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of the three secretions and of blood. It is cardiac, astringent, and improves the complexion. I have found the white the most effectual, and have often used its conserve and distilled water in lowness of spirits.

<p id=p788><ab type=parNum>788</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gomenduk</hi> <UR>gUmyd'k</UR>.&mdash;A common stone, resembling in its properties the <hi>Chanderkanth</hi>.

<p id=p789><ab type=parNum>789</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gooma</hi> <UR>gUmA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India; sweet, pungent, hot, dry, heavy, aperient; used in disorders of wind, bile, mucus; in jaundice and in swellings, and is vermifuge. All this the author of the <hi>Dhara Shekoi</hi> has related. The common <hi>Gooma</hi> is different.

<p id=p790><ab type=parNum>790</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goww</hi> <corr sic="<URA>gU</URA>" resp=errata><UR>g'yU</UR></corr>.&mdash;A tree common in <hi>Cashmere</hi>, of a hot quality; used <pb id=pb132 n=132>in seminal weakness, inflammatory disorders of the nose, effects of poison, disorders of mucus, and Juzam. It is vermifuge; its fruit increases phlegm, and its gum is heavy, aphrodisiac; beneficial in disorders of wind.

<p id=p791><ab type=parNum>791</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kobhee</hi> <UR>kUb-hy</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Hieracum</hi>, Bruce MS.&rdquo; This is of three kinds, one of which is used as food for the parroquet. Its leaf is like that of the radish when in an imperfect state. It is cool, light, and astringent; used in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood; in seminal weakness, cough, boils, eruptions, and fever, and produces wind.

<p id=p792><ab type=parNum>792</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gowrbaghan</hi> <UR>gUbAg-hAn</UR>.&mdash;Cool; useful in general heat and disorders of blood.

<p id=p793><ab type=parNum>793</ab> <hi rend=sc>Godoon</hi> <UR>gUdUn</UR>.&mdash;A common grain used by villagers; tonic.

<p id=p794><ab type=parNum>794</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gowruk</hi> <UR>gUr'k</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Lawa</hi>.

<p id=p795><ab type=parNum>795</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koonj</hi> <UR>kUnj</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kulungh</hi>. Its meat cures disorders of wind and mucus.

<p id=p796><ab type=parNum>796</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koonch</hi> <UR>kUnch</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of Hindostan. If its seed-vessel be applied to the skin, it produces great itching; if it is washed in cow-dung and water, this effect will be removed. Its seed is like the bean, smooth, and of a purple color; it is hard, and if the end is cut off, and it be applied to the part stung by a scorpion, it will remove the pain, and cannot be removed till the poison is extracted; and when this is accomplished, it falls off itself, and will be found from its power of suction to have become much larger. It is sweet, increases semen, lengthens aphrodisia, and is useful in diffusion of bile in the blood. It is beneficial in old ulcers, and is a favorite ingredient in aphrodisiac formulæ.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Kooch</hi> is a medicine of India; its seed cold <hi>and hot</hi> in equilibrium; drying, aphrodisiac; strengthens the loins, useful in piles and cough, and increases the consistence of semen. If half a direm of the leaves be bruised with seven of the long fruit of the peepul in water, and given to drink, it will be found powerfully vermifuge. It also clears the intestines of all noxious matter. If 10 direms be bruised in 50 direms of water, and drank for seven days, it will cure Lues Venerea.

<pb id=pb133 n=133><p>The succedaneum is <hi>Aotungun</hi>. The dose two direms of the seed. It is also called <hi>Kooncha</hi>, vide Kewanch.

<p id=p797><ab type=parNum>797</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kowrie</hi> <UR>kUrI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cypræa Monita.</hi>&rdquo; P. <hi>Khirmora</hi>. It is sweet and pungent, cool and flatulent; used in bile and heat; beneficial in affections of the eyes and in blisters. If burnt and introduced into the ear, I have found it of use in diseases of that organ. It is excellent for cleansing and drying venereal sores.

<p id=p798><ab type=parNum>798</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kawaal</hi> <UR>kU'Al</UR>.&mdash;(<hi>The Hog.</hi>) Its meat is heating, moist, light, and increases semen to a great degree; induces corpulence, creates appetite, and is tonic. Its fat is very aphrodisiac as an external application; it is also useful as an application to the eyes, as a stomachic, preserving health, and producing aphrodisia. Is tonic; useful in sprains and disorders of the three secretions. P. <hi>Khunzeer</hi>.

<p id=p799><ab type=parNum>799</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kowa</hi> <UR>kUA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>The Crow.</hi> P. <hi>Zaagh</hi> or <hi>Kolagh</hi>. A. <hi>Ghorab</hi>. Its properties are mentioned in Yunani works in India; it is also called <hi>Koral</hi>.

<p id=p800><ab type=parNum>800</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kokla</hi> <UR>kUklA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Indian Cuckoo.</hi>&rdquo;  A black bird, which in the commencement of the hot weather has a fine and strong note; its flesh creates appetite, induces costiveness, and is useful in disorders of wind and mucus.

<p id=p801><ab type=parNum>801</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goh</hi> <UR>gU"h</UR>.&mdash;<hi>The Guana.</hi> Its flesh is tonic, aphrodisiac, stomachic, and used in disorders of bile and wind. A. <hi>Zubbub</hi>. P. <hi>Soosmar</hi>.

<p id=p802><ab type=parNum>802</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kowadoorie</hi> <UR>kUAdUry</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Hubbunneel</hi>.

<p id=p803><ab type=parNum>803</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gokhroo</hi> <UR>gUk-hrU</UR> also <hi>Kunthphill</hi>; cures difficulty of breathing, cough, and suppression of urine. Is lithontriptic; useful in affections of the heart and wind.

<p>A. <hi>Khussuk</hi>. It is of two kinds, a cultivated and wild. Its plant is like the melon; its branches spreading widely on the ground. Its fruit is hard and triangular, with prickles on its angles; thus it is called <hi>Gokhroo.</hi> P. <hi>Kharkhusuk</hi>. There is a larger kind called <hi>Gokhroo Dekanee</hi>. In the <hi>Dhunterri</hi>, it is said to be beneficial in the three secretions, to create appetite, beneficial in dysentery and pains of the bowels, to increase semen, induce corpulency, to be cool, sweet, and aphrodisiac, tonic, <pb id=pb134 n=134>useful in seminal weakness, gonorrh&oelig;a, and pains in the urinary bladder. &ldquo;<hi>Tribulus Lanuginosus.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p804><ab type=parNum>804</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gowdunta</hi> <UR>gU'dn'tA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>arsenic</hi>, of a light red color.

<p id=p805><ab type=parNum>805</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gota</hi> <UR>gU'tA</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, bitter, pungent, hot, light, and aphrodisiac; useful in <hi>Soorkhbad</hi>, acne, cough, Juzam, and disorders of wind and bile.

<p id=p806><ab type=parNum>806</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kookurchundie</hi> <UR>kUkrchndI</UR>.&mdash;Obtains the name from its being an emetic to dogs.

<p id=p807><ab type=parNum>807</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kookurbangra</hi> <UR>kUkrbAng'rA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kukrownda</hi>.

<p id=p808><ab type=parNum>808</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goondroo</hi> <UR>gUndrU</UR> or <hi>Goonderuk</hi>. A name for <hi>Koondur</hi>, a gum resembling <hi>Mastich</hi>, but more red; it cures disorders of wind, mucus, and fever; restrains perspiration; is aphrodisiac; strengthens memory; gives tone to the stomach, urinary bladder, brain.

<p id=p809><ab type=parNum>809</ab> <hi rend=sc>Googul</hi> <UR>gUgl</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Amygris Agalocha</hi> (Roxb.) sweet and bitter, hot and aperient; increases appetite; increases the bulk of the solids, and is aphrodisiac; reunites fractured bones, discusses indurations; used in disorders of wind, mucus, blood, boils, eruptions, ill-conditioned ulcers, seminal weakness, <hi>Juzam</hi>, <hi>Soorkhbad</hi>, debility, emaciation, sweating sickness, acne, and swellings. The older it is the more effectual. It forms an ingredient in all favorite formulæ. A. <hi>Mukul</hi>. One kind is called <hi>Bhainsia Googul</hi>.

<p id=p810><ab type=parNum>810</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goondinie</hi> <UR>gUndnI</UR>.&mdash;A common fruit of Hindostan, of a red color, and fine coat, about the size of the <hi>Khalsa</hi>, or larger, and more oval. It is aperient, suppurant, and vermifuge. It is sweet and cool; of use in cough and flatulence, but if taken in quantity, produces nausea.

<p id=p811><ab type=parNum>811</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gooha</hi> <UR>gUhA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Perestpirnie</hi>; also the name of an insect like the cricket, but larger; it makes much noise in the rains.

<p id=p812><ab type=parNum>812</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goolur</hi> <UR>gUlr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Ficus Glomerata.</hi>&rdquo; A common fruit; when young, it is green, but when ripe, it becomes red, and in this state it is filled with small insects; it is said that if <corr sic=eat>eaten</corr> without being opened, it will be found beneficial for the eyes. It is called cool and dry; some say hot and moist: but in my opinion it is cool <pb id=pb135 n=135>and moist, and decreases bile. My father prescribed it in its unripe state in laxities of the bowels, and also in bleeding piles. The physicians of India have described it as astringent; it is slow of digestion. The bark of the tree is useful in ulcers, and as an external application in severe bruises. Water drank after its use, produces pain in the bowels. The <hi>Goolur</hi> eat with barley-meal or sugar, is useful in giddiness and heat in the liver. Its milk applied to boils, hasten suppuration or resolution.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Goolur</hi> is cool and moist; useful in bilious complaints, heat, thirst, and running at the nose from heat. The decoction of the bark removes poison from wounds inflicted by the claws of the tiger, cat, or other animal. The root bruised in water is useful in dysentery, in a dose of two direms.

<p id=p813><ab type=parNum>813</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goonma</hi> <UR>gUnmA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Pharnaceum mollugo.</hi>&rdquo; The plant grows in waste and wild places, and is very common. It is about a yard high, and grows in the rains; it is many-flowered; and when young they are of a red color, but become grey when dry, and full of small holes; they are round and curled.

<p id=p814><ab type=parNum>814</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koonda</hi> <UR>gUndA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Koonda</hi>, called also <hi>Pita</hi>. A. <hi>Midjdubeh</hi>, and in P. <hi>Puzdubeh</hi>. It is a creeper; its leaves like the Gourd leaf, or larger; its fruit twice as large as a melon. When unripe, it is cooling, and useful in bilious disorders and wind; it increases mucus. When ripe, it is sweet and pungent; it is equal in its properties; light; creates appetite; assists digestion; useful in disorders of the stomach and of the three secretions. The fibres of its root, its leaves, and branches, are sweet; beneficial in disorders of wind and mucus; are lithontriptic: the soft part of the fruit is sweet, removes gravel and other disorders of the urinary bladder; cures bilious disorders, and is aphrodisiac. The particular mode of administering it, I have described in my other works. It is very useful as an aphrodisiac, and for increasing the bulk of the solids. <hi>Cucurbita Pepo.</hi><corr sic="&rdquo;"></corr>

<p>Its sherbet is useful in all the disorders above mentioned, also in depression of spirits from heat, in mania or disordered imagination; increases appetite and evacuates bile.


<pb id=pb136 n=136><p rend="align(center)"><hi>The sherbet is thus prepared</hi>:

<p>A piece is cut off from the end of the fruit, and the inside scooped out till the hand can be admitted; this is to be filled with fine sugar, taking care to preserve all the juice. The divided piece is then to be re-applied, the division secured with moistened flour; it is then placed in the sun, during the hot season, for four days, or in the cold weather for a week. It by this process becomes acid like oxymel; the juice is then taken out, strained, and seasoned with cardamums, saffron, musk, and cloves, or other articles as may be deemed proper, and preserved in bottles for use; the dose is four tolahs, but it will not keep good beyond a week.

<p id=p815><ab type=parNum>815</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khaer</hi> <UR>k-hyr</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Kut</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Acacia Catechu</hi>, <hi>Mimosa Catechu</hi>. <hi>Chadira</hi>, S.<corr>&rdquo;</corr> A tree of the jungles, from which Catechu is produced. It is called also <hi>Cudder</hi>. &ldquo;One of the best applications in ulcers I ever tried, is composed of <hi>Catechu</hi>, <hi>Camphor</hi>, and <hi>white lead</hi>, in equal parts.&rdquo;&mdash;Trans.

<p id=p816><ab type=parNum>816</ab> <hi rend=sc>Geerehti</hi> <UR>gyr-h'tI</UR>.&mdash;A plant, about a yard high, or less; the largest kind is named <hi>Geerehta</hi>, also <hi>Mahabela</hi>. Its leaves are larger, as well as the tree, than the <hi>Geerehtee</hi>; but the latter is to be preferred as a medicine. It is sweet, cool, moist, and astringent, useful in Soorkhbad, disorders of bile, affections of the uterus, and clears the complexion.

<p id=p817><ab type=parNum>817</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kherie</hi> <UR>k-h'rI</UR>.&mdash;An earth of a white color used in cleaning houses; one kind of it is called <hi>Goorboghan</hi>.

<p id=p818><ab type=parNum>818</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kyrnie</hi> <UR>kyrnI</UR>.&mdash;One kind of it is named <hi>Chupuk</hi>. It is the fruit of a very large tree, of a yellow color, about the size of a date, but thicker; both kinds are cool and moist, heavy and tonic; useful in thirst, delirium, heaviness of the head, and disorders of all the secretions. If the kernel is bruised in water and applied to the eyes, it will remove opacities of the cornea&mdash;this I know from my grand-father&apos;s experience.

<p>In my opinion, it is cardiac and stomachic, and gently astringent; when ripe it is very generally useful. Some have called it hot in the second and dry in the first degree. If eaten when unripe, there is fear of its producing cholic. Its corrector is dhaie. The kernel is bitter.

<pb id=pb137 n=137><p id=p819><ab type=parNum>819</ab> <hi rend=sc>Koontanduk</hi> <UR>kUk'tAnd'k</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Rice</hi>, like the <hi>Saatee</hi> in its properties.

<p id=p820><ab type=parNum>820</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghora</hi> <UR>k-hU'rA</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Asp.</hi> The horse; its meat is sweet to the taste, but bitter in digestion. It is light, creates appetite, increases bile and mucus, beneficial in disorders of wind, and increases aphrodisia. It is generally tonic, and strengthens the eyes. I have often eat of it, and believe it to be hot and tonic, but it is hurtful to those of hot temperament. In some countries, it is used as food, and it was so used by Vizier Nawab Kumruddin Khan. I have remarked, that when used in this country as food by the natives of other countries, it produces a fermentation in the blood, and consequent eruptions in the mouth and tongue. Its properties are particularly noticed in Yunani works, and I have conversed with many who considered the milk of the mare excellent as a stomachic and aphrodisiac.

<p id=p821><ab type=parNum>821</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khutmul</hi> <UR>k-h'tml k'tml</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Saas</hi>. A. <hi>Fusafush</hi>. It is bred in beds or other furniture. Its smell is very useful in epilepsy; bruised in water and used as an injection into the urethra, it will be found useful in suppression of urine.

<p id=p822><ab type=parNum>822</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kujoor</hi> <UR>kjUr</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Ph&oelig;nix dactylifera</hi> or <hi>Ph&oelig;nix Silvestris</hi> or <hi>Khurjoor</hi>. A. <hi>Kittub</hi>. It has many fruits, even to the number of many hundreds: in its properties it is very similar to the <hi>Pind-Kajoor</hi>.

<p id=p823><ab type=parNum>823</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khaperia</hi> <UR>k-hpryA</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Tooti</hi>. P. <hi>Sungbusseri</hi>. It is useful in affections of the eyes and eye sight. Its powder beneficial for cleaning and healing ulcers. Its ointment I have noticed in my other publications. I have known a person who used it commonly as a tonic to the stomach, and for correcting laxities of the bowels. It is also used in Indian Recipes, but I have never seen that any physician of celebrity recommended its use.

<p id=p824><ab type=parNum>824</ab> <hi rend=sc>Keera</hi> <UR>kyrA</UR> or <hi>Kheera</hi>. One kind of this is bitter, but both are cool and dry, diuretic, and aperient; useful in disorders of bile, lithontriptic, and beneficial in suppression of urine. The ripe fruit is sweet and little astringent. The Balum-kheera is a kind of this, but of less efficacy. The large kind, from its efficacy and scarcity, was usually sent to the emperor by the Marwar Rajah. It is highly spoken of for the cure of Remittent Fever.

<pb id=pb138 n=138><p id=p825><ab type=parNum>825</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khand</hi> <UR>k-hAn'd</UR>.&mdash;Heavy, creating appetite, tonic, aperient; useful in thirst, general heat, delirium, disorders of bile and wind; but if eaten to excess it produces bile.

<p id=p826><ab type=parNum>826</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khylakhylie</hi> <UR>k-hylAk-hylI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Silleekha</hi>. Its rind is hard and thick, and of a round shape; it is of a reddish clay color. It is the bark of a tree; some say it is not the <hi>Silleekha</hi>, but that it nearly resembles it. It forms an ingredient in formulæ for strengthening the loins and kidnies. It dries up the vagina, and is used by women in the cold season as an ingredient in <hi>Peendie</hi>.

<p id=p827><ab type=parNum>827</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ghekwaar</hi> <UR>g-hI kUAr</UR> or <hi>Ghwar</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Aloe Perfoliata</hi>, W. <hi>Ghrita Cumari</hi> and <hi>Taruni</hi>, S. <hi>Elwa</hi> (the gum), H. <hi>Musebber</hi>, A. <hi>Suc d&apos;Aloes</hi> (the gum), F. <hi>Glausinde Aloe</hi>, G. <hi>Aloe</hi>, I. <hi>Aloe</hi>, Sp.&rdquo; It is the <hi>Sibr</hi> plant, and is in height about a yard, becoming small towards the top; it is full of juice of an offensive smell; it (the leaf) is serrated on the edges, and is of a green color. It is bitter, cool, and aperient, useful in affections of the spleen and liver, disorders of mucus, bile, blood, fever, blisters, and hardness of the skin; and slightly increases bile. If rubbed with water on the hands, fire may be held with impunity. Its juice is well known as a medicine, mixed with anise seed; it is excellent in pains of the bowels. I have written more of its virtues in my other works, and the prescription there mentioned is excellent in all disorders from cold. The pulp of the leaf with alum and opium is excellent in ophthalmia; its juice dropt into the eye.

<p id=p828><ab type=parNum>828</ab> <hi rend=sc>Goongchee</hi> <UR>gUnchI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Abrus Precatorius.</hi> <hi>Gooncha</hi>, H. <hi>Gunja</hi>, S. The seed called <hi>Retti</hi>, H. <hi>Rectica</hi>, S. The root of the plant coincides very exactly in appearance, taste, and medicinal qualities with the liquorice root, and is sold for it in the bazar; vide <hi>Glycine Abrus</hi>, Linn, Flem.&rdquo;


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Goongchee</hi>, called also <hi>Retti</hi>, is hot and dry; its dose one direm. In the opinion of the people of India, it is cool and dry in the third degree. It is emetic, and violently purgative, and is considered a poison. If the Goongchee is reduced to a coarse powder, moistened with water, and bruised and fried in sweet oil, till it is dissolved; this oil applied in the morning to the head, and <pb id=pb139 n=139>washed off at night, and this repeated for 21 days, it will greatly increase the growth of the hair; its leaves and branches thus prepared have the same effect

<p>If the <hi>Red Goongcha</hi>, having its bark peeled off, be coarse pounded to the quantity of eight ounces, and boiled in eight pounds of cow&apos;s milk, till only three pounds remain, then coagulated, and its butter extracted; the butter will reproduce hair on any parts which may have been deprived of it by venereal or other disease, and the effect will take place by its continuance for a fortnight. The <hi>white Goonchee</hi>, in the quantity of two direms, given internally for three days, with sugar, to a woman, will render her barren.

<p id=p829><ab type=parNum>829</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khelowrie</hi> <UR>k-hylUrI</UR>.&mdash;The name for the composition of certain pills, about the size of <hi>Peepul</hi> seed, sold covered with silver leaf; they are highly scented, and improve the smell of the mouth; they enliven the spirits and strengthen the stomach. They are made of Kuth in this manner:

<p>The <hi>Catechu</hi> is first mixed well with water, and the precipitate taken for use. This is boiled in cow&apos;s milk, or sometimes in the above-mentioned water; then <hi>Musk Amber</hi> and <hi>Rose-water</hi> are added, or the distilled water of <hi>Keora</hi>, and from this the pills are formed.

<p id=p830><ab type=parNum>830</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khull</hi> <UR>k-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kus&apos;boosum seem</hi>; the refuse of <hi>Till</hi>. It is heavy and flatulent, weakens eye-sight; is aphrodisiac; and is used as a soap to remove grease from the hands.

<p id=p831><ab type=parNum>831</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khopra</hi> <UR>k-hprA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Narzeel</hi>. Its properties mentioned in Yunani works.

<p id=p832><ab type=parNum>832</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khewumberie</hi> <UR>k-hyUm byrI</UR>.&mdash;The wild fig; useful in white leprosy. All Indian physicians use the root in this disease, both internally and externally; some have called it hot, others cold; it is likewise named <hi>Kewumber</hi>.

<p id=p833><ab type=parNum>833</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khesoo</hi> <UR>k-hysU</UR>.&mdash;A root; the leaf of its tree resembles a tiger&apos;s claws. Its flower is yellow; the tree large and common all over the jungles, and becomes of a red color like fire.

<p id=p834><ab type=parNum>834</ab> <hi rend=sc>Khynth</hi> <UR>k-hynt-h"h</UR>.&mdash;A tree of India; its fruit acid like the apple when unripe; it is light; cures thirst, hiccup, disorders of wind and bile. It clears the throat; is difficult of digestion, and strengthens <pb id=pb140 n=140>the stomach, and is lithontriptic; beneficial in fulness of the head, and is cool and dry in the second degree.

<p id=p835><ab type=parNum>835</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gheyd</hi> <UR>gyd</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Vulture</hi><corr sic=" (Hawk)" resp=errata></corr>. Its flesh is beneficial in disorders of the eyes; it is a bird of prey; hot and dry: it is of a black color, though some have described it as grey. The <hi><corr sic=Baar resp=errata>Baaz</corr></hi> and <hi>Joorra</hi> are used in hawking. A. <hi>Okab</hi>, P. <hi>Aal</hi>.

<p id=p836><ab type=parNum>836</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kinchua</hi> <UR>kynchU</UR>.&mdash;A name of <hi>Kherrateen</hi>. The earth-worm. It is used in oil and fomentation as an aphrodisiac, and for this purpose the most powerful is the <hi>Lumbricus</hi> discharged from the human subject.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p>It is said, that if the <hi>Kinchua</hi> be dried and mixed with dhaie, it will contract the vagina. If it be mixed with sweet oil, and boiled, and in this <hi>Zaftroomie</hi> (pitch) be dissolved, and the mixture externally applied, it will increase the size of the male organ. From the worm a kind of copper is procured, which is called in India <hi>Paak Tamba</hi>. If put in the mouth it has this effect, that the taste of the neeb, or pungency of chunam will not be perceptible. It is an antidote to all animal as well as vegetable poisons, and hydrophobia; useful in want of power in the digestive organs and pains in the bowels. Its powder is useful in the <hi>Soorkhbad</hi>, and kept in the mouth, prevents thirst; and if kept about the person a snake will not approach or bite. Thus prepared:&mdash;The fresh worms are taken and put into a copper vessel, over them is poured lime juice, and the vessel well luted, is placed on the fire; when well boiled, the medicine will be found adhering to the top and sides of the vessel.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Another mode.</hi>

<p>Take of white lead and borax, each eight direms; turmeric and bullock&apos;s bile, each four direms; worms and honey, each 24 direms; mix and fry the whole in cow&apos;s <hi>ghee</hi>, and when fried, make the mass into balls. Place these balls in an earthen vessel on the fire, and by means of bellows increase the heat, and keep it so, for some time; and when taken off the fire, the <hi>Paak Tamba</hi> will be found in small grains at the bottom.

<pb id=pb141 n=141><p id=p837><ab type=parNum>837</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gyndha</hi> <UR>gynd-hA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Rhinoceros.</hi> A four-footed beast, larger than the buffaloe. Its skin black and indented; it is very hard, and used for making shields, which are held in great estimation. It has a horn near its nose. Its flesh is used in disorders of wind, and decreases urine and fæces. The smoke of the horn while burning is excellent in the cure of piles, and for producing easy labour; drinking water from a cup made of the horn will also cure the piles. P. <hi>Kurguddun</hi>.

<p id=p838><ab type=parNum>838</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kenkra</hi> <UR>kynk'rA</UR>.&mdash;Its flesh is cool, and strengthens the seven component parts of the body; is aphrodisiac, and remedies profuse discharge of the menses. &ldquo;<hi>The Crab.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p839><ab type=parNum>839</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kesur</hi> <UR>kysr</UR> or <hi>Kunkum</hi>. <hi>Saffron.</hi> It is pungent and hot; exhilirates the spirit; useful in hiccup and in affections of the skin from a taint in the blood; it is beneficial in head-ache; allays vomiting; is vermifuge; cures boils and disorders of the three secretions, and cleans the complexion. P. <hi>Zaffraan</hi>.

<p id=p840><ab type=parNum>840</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kyte</hi> <corr sic="<URA>kytI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>gyt</UR></corr>.&mdash;When unripe, it is light; induces costiveness; used in disorders of the three secretions. When ripe, it becomes of a bitterish sweet, and is useful in dropsy, eruptions of the mouth, and in wind. It is heavy, clears the throat, is slow of digestion, and allays thirst.

<p id=p841><ab type=parNum>841</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kytiputtrie</hi> <UR>kytI ptrI</UR>.&mdash;Its leaves resemble the <hi>Kyte</hi>; it is hot and pungent; used in disorders from poison, phlegm in the throat, and seminal weakness.

<p id=p842><ab type=parNum>842</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kyloot</hi> <UR>kylU't</UR>.&mdash;Cool, astringent; useful in eruptions of the mouth, in mucus, and flatulent disorders.

<p id=p843><ab type=parNum>843</ab> <hi rend=sc>Keora</hi> <UR>kyU'rA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Pandanus Odoratissimus</hi>, (Roxb.) It is like the <hi>Ketki</hi>, but it is twice as large; its leaves are prickly, and about the same thickness throughout. It is in fact like a head of Indian corn before its leaves recede. It has a very powerful, penetrating, diffusible scent, more perceptible at a distance than when close; and after it is dried the smell remains. If it is put amongst linen, the smell will adhere to it for a length of time. The plant is about 12 feet high; its leaves resemble the Juwar, and are long and trefoil, with prickles upon all of them; it flowers when four years old. Earth is thrown up round the roots every <pb id=pb142 n=142>year. In the Deccan and in Behar, it is very common. A distilled water is made from its flowers, which is cardiac and stomachic.

<p id=p844><ab type=parNum>844</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kethki</hi> <UR>kytkI</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Pandanus Odoratissimus</hi>, for it is a kind of Keora. The <hi>Sirrunkethkie</hi> is also a species of this.

<p id=p845><ab type=parNum>845</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kewanch</hi> <UR>kyUAnch</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, hot, heavy, and aphrodisiac; produces an increased secretion of semen. Its seed is useful in disorders of wind, and is also aphrodisiac. It is a name for <hi>Kabeakudje</hi>, and that is a species of Curruf&apos;s junglee. It is also a name for <hi>Dolichos Pruriens</hi> or Cow-itch.

<p id=p846><ab type=parNum>846</ab> <hi rend=sc>Kela</hi> <UR>kylA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Musa Paradisiaca.</hi> The <hi>Plantain</hi> or <hi>Banana</hi>. The tree is straight, about the height of a spear. Its leaves, when young, come out in the form of a round ruler, and are soft as satin, and much resembling it, with cross marks resembling the plaits of cloth. The leaf when expanded is very long and broad. Its flower is a hard substance, of a pyramidal shape, and covered with leaves of a dark-red color. Every tree which has flowered bears 70 or 80 plantains, formed in distinct rows round a centre stem, and the tree bears only once. And the fruit ripe, the tree must be cut down, to leave room for others to spring up from the same root. There are many kinds of this fruit. The best kind is small, and called <hi>Imrutbean</hi>; and the people of India have said that the camphor is produced from it: but those who say so are ignorant, the camphor tree is very different. Its root is tonic; beneficial in disorders of bile, blood, and mucus, and in gonorrh&oelig;a; but it weakens aphrodisia. The fruit is sweet, cool, moist, and heavy; increases flatulence and mucus; useful in disorders of bile, blood, wind, and heat of the chest. A. <hi>Mooz</hi>. The natives of India dress the unripe fruit with meat, or even dress it alone; and the Hindoos dress the heart of the branches for food. This I have found very effectual as an aphrodisiac and for increasing semen, and as a tonic to the brain. It weakens the stomach, and is heavy; its corrector is cardamum seed. The Yunani physicians say, that its correctors are honey, gum, and ginger.

<p id=p847><ab type=parNum>847</ab> <hi rend=sc>Keetkarode</hi> <UR>kytkArUd</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Baraicund</hi>.

<p id=p848><ab type=parNum>848</ab> <hi rend=sc>Keekur</hi> <UR>kykr</UR> or <hi>Babool</hi>. &ldquo;Acacia Arabica, W. <hi>Babool</hi>, H. <pb id=pb143 n=143><hi>Barbura</hi>, <hi>S. Babool ka Goond</hi> (the gum), H. The bark, like that of most of the Acacias, is a powerful astringent, and is used as a substitute for Oak bark in tanning by leather-manufacturers in India. <hi>Gomme Arabique</hi>, F. <hi>Arabischen Gummi</hi>, G. <hi>Gomma Arabica</hi>, I. <hi>Vullam pisin</hi>, Tam.&rdquo; A common prickly tree of the jungles; its leaves very numerous and small; it is of two kinds, a large and a small. The young trees have very numerous prickles, the old trees have fewer; its bark kept in the mouth relieves cough. Its leaves heated and applied to the eye removes heat and inflammation; both kinds are astringent, hot, and pungent, useful in cough, mucus, and diseases proceeding from mucus; restrain laxatives of the bowels, and are useful in piles. The young leaves infused for a night in water, in the morning bruised in the water, and this drank, will be found very useful in gonorrh&oelig;a and itchiness of the bladder.

<p id=p849><ab type=parNum>849</ab> <hi rend=sc>Keet</hi> <UR>kyt</UR> or <hi>Keetie</hi>. The refuse or scoriæ of iron; it is sweet, pungent, and hot; beneficial in wind, worms, cholicks, seminal weakness, and swellings.

<p id=p850><ab type=parNum>850</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gehoon</hi> <UR>gyhUn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Gundum</hi>. A. <hi>Hinta</hi>. It is oleaginous and slow of digestion; facilitates the junction of fractured bones. Is soft, tonic, useful in mucus, and increases semen. Its oil is beneficial in <hi>Daad</hi> and swellings from vitiated bile. The oil is thus made:&mdash;White Gehoon is moistened for a night in water, and in the morning the oil is extracted.

<p id=p851><ab type=parNum>851</ab> <hi rend=sc>Geroo</hi> <UR>gyrU</UR>.&mdash;It is sweet, astringent, and cool; useful in ulcers; clears the skin; beneficial in piles, heat, and incipient phlegmon. It resembles the Gilermonie, and is often substituted for it.



<div1 id=lam>
<head><UR>l</UR></head>


<p id=p852><ab type=parNum>852</ab> <hi rend=sc>Laak</hi> <UR>lA'k</UR>.&mdash;Common lac is a kind of wax, formed by the <hi>Coccus Lacca</hi>: cool, moist; clears the color of the skin; is aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of mucus, blood, bile; and is vermifuge. It also cures boils, eruptions, acne, bruises, and Juzam, and removes possession by evil spirits. I have found it to be very aphrodisiac.

<p>This is the gum of the <hi>Baer</hi> tree. There is one kind of Seed Lac, which when melted becomes like this.

<p id=p853><ab type=parNum>853</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lahi</hi> <UR>lAhI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Ulsee</hi>.

<p id=p854><ab type=parNum>854</ab> <hi rend=sc>Langullie</hi> <UR>lAngUlI</UR>.&mdash;The name of a shrub, pungent and hot; <pb id=pb144 n=144>useful in disorders of wind, mucus, and ulcers, also in affections of the stomach and bowels; is laxative.

<p id=p855><ab type=parNum>855</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lubhera</hi> <UR>lUb-hyrA</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;Hot; antidote to poison; useful in blisters, boils, acne, and Juzam; strengthens the hair of the head; is aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of wind, blood, and in hectic fever.

<p id=p856><ab type=parNum>856</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lublie</hi> <UR>lblI</UR> or <hi>Lolie</hi>. A high tree with very numerous leaves and branches; the leaves are smooth and shining, and when rubbed, have a sweet smell: they are of a yellowish color. Its bark is soft and flexible; the fruit like the Malkungnie, but of a dark-purple color. The properties of the fruit are, that it cures disorders of blood, and piles, superabundance of wind, and eruptions of the mouth. It is light, and the kernel of the seed is of the same nature.

<p id=p857><ab type=parNum>857</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lutoobrie</hi> <corr sic="<URA>U'tbrI</URA>" resp=errata><UR>ltUbrI</UR></corr>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Soonitjhal</hi>. The plant is about half a yard in height, it grows in the hot weather on the banks of the rivers or near water; brought in contact with the skin, it produces itching and pimples. The Hindoos use it as pickles by cutting the branches in pieces, infusing them in water for several days till they become sour. It is hot, and its juice very useful in ringworm. It in the first place causes a great discharge of water from the parts, and then heals them up. If it is bruised and applied for three days to parts void of sensation, it will produce blisters, and the water being discharged, and common ointment applied to the parts, the cure will be found complete. It dissipates wind. The leaves resemble Tirriteruk; the flower is yellow like the <hi>Baboona</hi>.

<p id=p858><ab type=parNum>858</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lydoaloo</hi> <UR>lydUAlU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Mimosa Natans.</hi>&rdquo; Bitter, astringent, and cool; used in the cure of disorders of mucus and bile, eruptions from diffusion of bile, pains or inflammation in the female parts of generation, and restrains diarrh&oelig;a. It is sensitive, and contracts to the touch. I have seen the plants, and noticed that the leaves resembled those of the tamarind, but are smaller. Its branches small, with very minute prickles. It is said that it grows to a yard in height, and that it is so very sensitive that it contracts if a shadow passes over it.

<p id=p859><ab type=parNum>859</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lichmuna</hi> <UR>lchmUnA</UR>.&mdash;The female called <hi>Lichmunie</hi>. It is cool, aperient, and aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of wind, bile<corr sic=", a"></corr> <pb id=pb145 n=145>and mucus. It is the name of the Nuffaa, also called the small <hi>Kuthui</hi>.

<p id=p860><ab type=parNum>860</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lichmiphill</hi> <UR>lchmI p-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Bele</hi>.

<p id=p861><ab type=parNum>861</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lichkutch</hi> <UR>lchkch</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Burhel</hi>, also called <hi>Lukitch</hi>.

<p id=p862><ab type=parNum>862</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lukmunia</hi> <UR>lkmnI</UR> and <hi>Lukmunie</hi>. Names for <hi>Litchmuna</hi>. In A. called <hi>Beroogus sunum</hi>. P. <hi>Mirdumgeea</hi>.

<p id=p863><ab type=parNum>863</ab> <hi rend=sc>Loodh&apos;phup</hi> <UR>lUd"h pxl</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, cool, moist, and light; tonic, astringent, and diuretic; relieves disorders of bile, and slightly increases mucus and wind.

<p id=p864><ab type=parNum>864</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lodh</hi> <UR>lUd"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Simplocus Racemosa.</hi>&rdquo; A kind of this is white<corr>.</corr> I have not seen the tree; the bark is brought from the hills; thick, and of a white color; both kinds are astringent, cool, and aperient; strengthens the eyes; beneficial in disorders of mucus, blood, and swellings; useful in vomiting of blood, and is laxative. Its flower is sweet, bitter, and astringent; of use in affections of the eyes and mucus; increases the consistence of semen, and is an ingredient in all aphrodisiac formulæ. The particular manner of its administration I have given in my other publications. The <hi>Lodh Pytanee</hi> is a kind of this.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi><corr sic=Maadenterzerrubad>Maadentezerrubad</corr>.</hi>

<p><hi>Lodh</hi> is of two kinds, one from <hi>Guzeerat</hi>, of a reddish clear color, the other from the hills of Hindustan, of a dirty greenish hue, and underneath reddish. The latter is used by the dyers, and the former in medicine. It is beneficial in disorders of the eyes; it is cool, dry, and astringent; restrains vomiting of blood; generally styptic, and as a cold application, removes pain of the eye. Dose one <hi>miskal</hi>.

<p id=p865><ab type=parNum>865</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lawa</hi> <UR>lUA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Perdix Chinensis.</hi>&rdquo; A bird smaller than the partridge; of this the people of India have enumerated four kinds&mdash;<hi>Bansal</hi>, <hi>Goruk</hi>, <hi>Goonderuck</hi>, and <hi>Durber</hi>. The meat of three of them is cool, moist, cardiac, astringent, and stomachic. The first kind is hot, increases mucus, and beneficial in disorders of wind. The second kind is useful in mucous disorders. The third kind is light; its properties in equilibrium; useful as food for the debilitated.

<p id=p866><ab type=parNum>866</ab> <hi rend=sc>Loonia</hi> <UR>lUnyA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi><corr sic=Portulacca>Portulaca</corr> oleracea.</hi>&rdquo; Culinary greens; another kind is called <hi>Koonder</hi>. Both are saltish to the taste, <pb id=pb146 n=146>and sweet during digestion; cool and dry, heavy and aperient; increase wind and flatulent swellings of the abdomen, also bile and mucus. The other kind is understood to be hot; useful in difficulty of breathing, disorders of mucus, and increases flatulence.

<p id=p867><ab type=parNum>867</ab> <hi rend=sc>Loha</hi> <UR>lUhA</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Ferrum</hi>, <hi>Iron</hi>. <hi>Ayas</hi>, S. Sweet and astringent, cool and aphrodisiac, aperient and heavy; useful in disorders of mucus and bile, and in swellings; it produces wind. Its scoriæ are called <hi>Rubusool hudeed</hi>; it is given both in powder and pills: the method of its preparation I have given in my other works. I have given iron in piles from cold, also for strengthening the stomach, for lengthening aphrodisia, and generally as an aphrodisiac. I have also exhibited it with success in dropsy. It is commonly used by physicians in India, but my advice is to have as little to do with it as possible.

<p id=p868><ab type=parNum>868</ab> <hi rend=sc>Long</hi> <UR>lUng</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Caryophillus Aromaticus.</hi>&rdquo; A. <hi>Kurnphul</hi>. Its properties are particularized in Yunani works. If it be introduced into an apple, and the apple left to dry, then taken out, I have found it an excellent tonic to the stomach, possessing a cardiac property, useful in vomiting, and aiding digestion. The apple also will have become possessed of the same qualities.

<p id=p869><ab type=parNum>869</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lobaan</hi> <UR>lbAn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Libanus Thurifera</hi>, Coll. <hi>Boswellia</hi>, Roxb. <hi>Olibanum</hi>, <hi>Frankincense</hi>. <hi>Encens</hi>, F. <hi>Styrax Benzoin</hi>, Murr. Resin of <hi>Boswellia serrata</hi>, Roxb.&rdquo; The vizier of <hi>Ackber Shah</hi> has written, that this is a gum brought from beyond sea. It has a fine and penetrating smell when burnt; some call it <hi>Meeayabisa</hi>. It is very plentiful in this country.

<p>It would seem to be hot in the 2nd degree. In the refined state, it is most powerful, and very little of it will be sufficient.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Loban</hi> is called in P. <hi>Hussunluba</hi>. The people of India know it as a gum; its color is red, and mixed with pieces of white and black as large as a cowrie. It is hot in the 2nd degree and dry in the 1st. Its internal use is tonic to the stomach and brain; it discusses wind, removes phlegm, and is useful for removing running at the nose. In those of a hot temperament it removes head-ache. Its corrector is oil of the Banufsha or Khushkhash. <pb id=pb147 n=147>Its succedaneum Ladun and Mastichi in equal parts. The dose is from half direm to two direms. What is called in India Sut Loban is white, clear, and shining, like Talc, and is much used in mucous disorders and in paralysis. It is also beneficial in bad breath. It is stomachic, aphrodisiac, and assists digestion. The dose two soorkhs in Paan. The expressed oil, applied to the penis, is aphrodisiac, and also useful in disorders of mucus.

<p id=p870><ab type=parNum>870</ab> <hi rend=sc>Loni</hi> <UR>lUnI</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Neemuk</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p871><ab type=parNum>871</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lolie</hi> <UR>lUlI</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;A name for <hi>Lublie</hi>.

<p id=p872><ab type=parNum>872</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lomrie</hi> <UR>lUm'ry</UR>.&mdash;<hi>The Fox.</hi> A name for the <hi>Sheghal</hi> or <hi>Sial</hi>.

<p id=p873><ab type=parNum>873</ab> <hi rend=sc>Longmushk</hi> <UR>lUng mshk</UR>.&mdash;The name of a flower; its shrub about two yards in height, but of great diameter. It is white, sweet-smelling, hot, cardiac, and strengthens the brain.

<p id=p874><ab type=parNum>874</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lobeia</hi> <UR>lbyA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Dolichos Sinensis.</hi>&rdquo; A common culinary grain; hot and dry; creates flatulence; is diuretic, and increases the menstrual flux. It has also the effect of producing very unpleasant dreams.

<p>The red <hi>Lobeia</hi> procures the expulsion of the dead f&oelig;tus ex utero, and if ate with cow&apos;s ghee, it strengthens the digestive organs. A. <hi>Dizzer</hi>. P. <hi>Bakla</hi>.

<p id=p875><ab type=parNum>875</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lahsun</hi> <UR>lxsn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Allium Sativum</hi>, W. <hi>Lasuna</hi>, S. <hi>Ail</hi>, F. <hi>Knoblauch</hi>, G. <hi>Aglio</hi>, I. <hi>Ajo Sativo</hi>, S.&rdquo; Hot and moist; heavy, aperient, aphrodisiac; promotes digestion, and is useful externally in sprains and hurts; increases the hair and knowledge, also bile and blood; beneficial in disorders of mucus, wind, difficulty of breathing, cough, Badgola, intermittent fever, swellings, piles, Juzam, and seminal weakness. It is vermifuge, tonic, and cures loss of appetite. It is an ingredient in all favorite prescriptions.

<p>Its sherbet I have used with much effect in cases of paralysis. One kind of <hi>Lahsun</hi> is called <hi>Agbooptah</hi>. A. <hi>Mowseer</hi>. As a tonic, this is to be preferred, and its pickles are held in great estimation.

<p id=p876><ab type=parNum>876</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lasora</hi> <UR>lsUrA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Sobestens Cordia Myxa</hi>, W. A. <hi>Sepista</hi>.&rdquo; Its leaves bruised and applied to ill-conditioned ulcers, will cure them in 10 days.

<pb id=pb148 n=148><p id=p877><ab type=parNum>877</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lahusoonia</hi> <UR>lxsUnyA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Dedawrie</hi>. A. <hi>Aynulhur</hi>. See
<hi>Vidoorie</hi>.


<div1 id=meem>
<head><UR>m</UR></head>


<p id=p878><ab type=parNum>878</ab> <hi rend=sc>Malkungnie</hi> <UR>mAl knknI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Ceanothus Americanus?</hi> <hi>Celastrus.</hi>&rdquo; A seed resembling <hi>Anbus saleb</hi>, but smaller and variegated; its upper rind is green, inside which is red, and withinside this is found the seed fine long and of a reddish color; it is bitter and pungent, hot and aperient; useful in affections of wind and mucus, difficulty of breathing, and cough. It increases understanding and memory. In India, those who try its effects use it in many ways. One method is to eat one seed the first day, two the 2nd, and so on, increasing by one till 40 seeds are eaten in a day, then decrease in the same proportion. Some use it this way for only eight days, after which they continue to take this quantity without increase, and during its use, they abstain from all acids, sour milk, radishes, <hi>Till</hi>, limes, mustard, and other articles of this nature; during this time also, they separate beds from their wives.

<p>It increases the tone of the vessels; preserves health and strength.

<p>The Hindoos enumerate many virtues of which the drug is possessed. It is understood to be hot in the 1st degree, and dry in the 3rd. It is a favorite ingredient in fomentations, unguents, and prescriptions for aphrodisia and paralysis. It is in very general use.

<p id=p879><ab type=parNum>879</ab> <hi rend=sc>Madhooie</hi> <UR>mAd-hUI</UR>.&mdash;A flower of India; cool and light, and useful in disorders of the three secretions.

<p id=p880><ab type=parNum>880</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mansrowhnee</hi> <UR>mAns rU-hnI</UR>.&mdash;A purgative medicine, useful in disorders of wind, bile, and mucus, and is aphrodisiac.

<p id=p881><ab type=parNum>881</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maak</hi> <UR>mAgx"h</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Phaseolus Max.</hi> A name for <hi>Aorde</hi>, called also <hi>Maash</hi>; it is sweet during digestion; hot, heavy and aphrodisiac; used in disorders of wind; is tonic; a preservative to health, increases semen, milk, and fat; also mucus and bile; clears the urinary secretion; beneficial in piles, paralysis, affections of the liver, difficulty of breathing, and Badgola; said to be useful in cholic, but as to the three latter, I am not so certain about them, and suspect it might prove more likely to increase them.

<p id=p882><ab type=parNum>882</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maad</hi> <UR>mn'd</UR>.&mdash;The water in which rice has been boiled, and in which the rice has become decomposed; it is cool, astringent; <pb id=pb149 n=149>creates appetite; expels wind, mucus and bile; softens the muscles, and is beneficial in bilious or mucous fevers.

<p id=p883><ab type=parNum>883</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maien</hi> <UR>mAyn</UR>.&mdash;Acid, astringent, cool, and light; contracts the vagina; useful in dysentery, disorders of bile, blood, and mucus; also affections of the throat. A. <hi>Kuzmazidge</hi>. P. <hi>Kurmar</hi>.

<p id=p884><ab type=parNum>884</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maachik</hi> <UR>mAchq</UR>.&mdash;A name for honey of a reddish color; it is sweet, cool, dry, and light; reduces corpulency, strengthens vision, increases understanding, and beneficial in seminal weakness. The fresh kind is moist and aperient; that which is old is dry, and if heated is hurtful. I mean that which has been fermented, and that produced in hot climates.

<p id=p885><ab type=parNum>885</ab> <hi rend=sc>Majoophill</hi> <UR>mAjUp-hl</UR> or <hi>Maijphill</hi>. A. <hi>Affix</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Alleppo Galls</hi>, <hi>Quercus Cerris</hi>, <hi>Quercus Robur</hi>.&rdquo; It is hot and astringent; useful in wind; blackens the hair, and contracts the vagina.

<p id=p886><ab type=parNum>886</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maankund</hi> <UR>mAnknd</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Istolekund</hi>.

<p id=p887><ab type=parNum>887</ab> <hi rend=sc>Malook</hi> <UR>mAlU'k</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Palook</hi>.

<p id=p888><ab type=parNum>888</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahesingie</hi> <UR>mAhI snkI</UR>.&mdash;The author of the <hi>Dhara Shekoi</hi> has called this the water-scorpion; see <hi>Beechoo</hi>.

<p id=p889><ab type=parNum>889</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maat</hi> <UR>mA't</UR>.&mdash;The name of a culinary green, used as food. If the root of this plant be cleared of the bark, and 100 tolahs of this be boiled in 100 tolahs of milk, and as much fine honey, over a gentle fire, taken out and put in a vessel for use, it will be found highly useful in reproducing the secretion of milk in the breast of a woman, and is thus used: The woman is to anoint her body with sweet oil, then bathe in warm water, after which a little of this to be ate, and care taken that no wind obtain admission to the place where she sleeps; this done for 14 days, milk will be produced in great abundance.

<p id=p890><ab type=parNum>890</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maashpurnie</hi> <UR>mAshprnI</UR>.&mdash;Obtains its name from its leaves resembling <hi>Maash</hi>; it is called also <hi>Makonie</hi>; it is cool, dry, sweet, and pungent to the taste. Increases semen and mucus; useful in fever, eruptions of the mouth, dryness of the fauces, disorders of blood, and costiveness.

<p id=p891><ab type=parNum>891</ab> <hi rend=sc>Muttur</hi> <UR>m'tr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Pisum Sativum.</hi> P. <hi>Kusshuba</hi>.&rdquo; Hot, heavy, and aperient; increases wind, bile, and blood; is diuretic, and increases secretion of milk; useful in external swellings and disorders <pb id=pb150 n=150>of mucus, weakens eye-sight and decreases semen. One kind is called <hi>Betla</hi>, and another is very small; both of these are sweet to the taste; in digestion cool, light, and astringent; useful in disorders of wind, mucus, and bile, and it is the best food for cows.

<p id=p892><ab type=parNum>892</ab> <hi rend=sc>Muttreegurba</hi> <UR>m'try grbxA</UR>.&mdash;The eggs of fish. Moist, heavy, and aphrodisiac; tonic; induces corpulency, increases mucus and the bulk of the solids; brings on heaviness of the spirits and indolence, and cures seminal weakness.

<p id=p893><ab type=parNum>893</ab> <hi rend=sc>Muchechi</hi> <UR>mchychI</UR>.&mdash;Cool and astringent; useful in Juzam, disorders of bile and blood, and is vermifuge.

<p id=p894><ab type=parNum>894</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mucheli</hi> <UR>mch-hlI</UR>.&mdash;Hot, moist, heavy, aphrodisiac, and tonic; increases phlegm and bile; beneficial in the seven dhats, and useful in disorders of wind.

<p>The <hi>river fish</hi> is the best, and most powerful as an aphrodisiac, and tonic. The <hi>tank fish</hi> are cool, heavy, moist, and aphrodisiac, also diuretic. <hi>Well fish</hi> are aphrodisiac and diuretic, increase mucus, cause disorders of the bowels and Juzam, and are flatulent. The <hi>fish of jheels</hi>, or large pieces of water, have the same properties as the <hi>tank fish</hi>; and those of small pools or puddles are sweet, moist, tonic, and useful, and cure disorders of wind. <hi>Salt-water fish</hi> produce bile in a slight degree, and are heavy. <hi>All fish</hi> induce costiveness and decrease the strength of the eyes, and the clearer the water, the more beneficial and more powerful are the properties of the fish. It will be prudent not to use well fish in cold weather. One kind of fish is very small, and named Pothee, q. v.

<p id=p895><ab type=parNum>895</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mujeeth</hi> <UR>mjyt-h"h</UR>.&mdash;&apos;<hi>Rubia Munjith</hi>, Roxb. MS. Sp. ch. pentandrous, perennial, scandent, branches with four hisped angles, leaves quatern, long-petioled, cordate, acuminate, 5&ndash;7-nerved, hisped.&apos; &ldquo;<hi>Madder</hi>: given in the quantity of one pice weight in milk, several times repeated, its effects are very powerful; it affects the whole nervous system, produces profuse sweating, temporary delirium, mental agony and tears, with an evident determination to the uterine system.&rdquo;&mdash;<hi>Trans.</hi>

<p>A root of a red color, used by the dyers. It is an emmenagogue, and its taste is sweet, bitter, astringent; hot and heavy; <pb id=pb151 n=151>clears the voice and complexion; useful in disorders from poison, mucus, blood, swellings, ophthalmia, itchiness of the liver, pains, in the female parts of generation; Juzam, eruptions, acne, boils, seminal weakness, and dysentery. Its green leaves are sweet to the taste, moist, and create appetite, and beneficial in bilious disorders. A. <hi>Foo</hi>. H. <hi>Aal</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p896><ab type=parNum>896</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moojkund</hi> <UR>mjknd</UR>.&mdash;A small plant; pungent, bitter; useful in mucous disorders, cough, and itch. It is very common in hilly countries.

<p id=p897><ab type=parNum>897</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mudhraa</hi> <UR>md-hUrA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kakoli</hi>, from its sweet taste so called.

<p id=p898><ab type=parNum>898</ab> <hi rend=sc>Muddenphill</hi> <UR>mdn p-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mynphill</hi>.

<p id=p899><ab type=parNum>899</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mudden</hi> <UR>mdn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Moom</hi>.

<p id=p900><ab type=parNum>900</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mudh</hi> <UR>md-h"h</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Honey.</hi>

<p id=p901><ab type=parNum>901</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moodukpurnie</hi> <UR>mdkprnI</UR> or <hi>Rakanie</hi>. Cool; beneficial in cough, wind, blood, bilious heat, fever, semen, and eye-sight; it is also called <hi>Maagpurnie</hi>. It is called <hi>Mudukpurnie</hi>, from its leaf so nearly resembling that of the <hi>Moong</hi>; <hi>Muduk</hi> being a name for <hi>Moong</hi>, and <hi>purn</hi>, a leaf.

<p id=p902><ab type=parNum>902</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mudhoolka</hi> <UR>md-hUlkA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of grain; its properties the same as the <hi>Muckund</hi>.

<p id=p903><ab type=parNum>903</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mudhkurkuttie</hi> <UR>md-h"h krk'tI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of rice; sweet, cool, and heavy; increases blood and causes eruptions in the mouth.

<p id=p904><ab type=parNum>904</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moorhurrie</hi> <UR>mr-hrI</UR>.&mdash;Sweet and bitter, heavy and aperient; cures disorders of bile, blood, mucus, wind, thirst, affections of the heart, itch, Juzam, and fever.

<p id=p905><ab type=parNum>905</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moora</hi> <UR>mr-hA</UR>.&mdash;A leaf resembling the <hi>Mendhi</hi>, brought from Lahore; cool and light; cures possession from evil spirits; is vermifuge, and useful in disorders of bile, wind, and blood; also in Juzam.

<p id=p906><ab type=parNum>906</ab> <hi rend=sc>Merg</hi> <UR>mrg</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Ahoo</hi>. Its flesh is sweeter than of any other animal; a little acid and saltish; bitter, pungent, and astringent; it is cool and light, flatulent; creates appetite; useful in disorders of all the secretions; is tonic, cardiac, beneficial in fever, and is an excellent medicated food.

<p id=p907><ab type=parNum>907</ab> <hi rend=sc>Murua</hi> <UR>mrUA</UR>.&mdash;Some say this is hot and light in the 3rd degree, and some that it is in equilibrio; it loosens mucus from the head, <pb id=pb152 n=152>and dispels wind. If boiled in vinegar, and used as an external application to the head, it will remove obstructions that produce head-ache. Prepared in this way, it also removes swellings or eruptions caused by heat or irritating applications. It is cardiac and stomachic, discusses collections of bile, removes the effects of any animal poison, Juzam, and disorders of mucus and wind. Is vermifuge. A. <hi>Isoomulphar</hi>.

<p id=p908><ab type=parNum>908</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moorhuttee</hi> <UR>mr-h'tI</UR> or <hi>Mudhserda</hi>. Cool, heavy, tonic, and aperient; allays thirst and nausea, and relieves disorders of bile. A. <hi>Isilloosoos</hi>; it is the <hi>Baboonie</hi>.

<p id=p909><ab type=parNum>909</ab> <hi rend=sc>Merch</hi> <UR>mrch</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Piper Nigrum</hi>, W. <hi>Maricha</hi>, San. <hi>Poivre</hi>, F.&rdquo; Pungent, penetrating, stimulant, carminative; hot and dry; useful in disorders of mucus, wind, difficulty of breathing, and internal itchiness; is vermifuge; expels bile, and assists digestion.

<p id=p910><ab type=parNum>910</ab> <hi rend=sc>Merchai</hi> <UR>mrchAI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Hubboneel</hi>; hot, dry, and laxative; removes viscid bile, also mucus and worms.

<p id=p911><ab type=parNum>911</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mursa</hi> <UR>mrsA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Amaranthus oleraceus.</hi> A potherb.&rdquo; An esculent, succulent vegetable, which when boiled with salt and butter is sweet, high-flavored, and aperient.

<p id=p912><ab type=parNum>912</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mernal</hi> <UR>mrnAl</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;The stem of the <hi>Kawul</hi> flower.

<p id=p913><ab type=parNum>913</ab> <hi rend=sc>Murorphillie</hi> <UR>mrUrp-hlI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Helieteres Isora.</hi>&rdquo; A medicine of India. P. <hi>Kistburkisht</hi> (<hi>Sheeraree Pechuc</hi>); a long twisted shrub, having a single flower, of a purple color; its leaves resemble the scorpion&apos;s tail; hot and dry in the 2nd degree; some call it hot in the 1st and dry in the 2nd degree. It assists digestion, and clears the skin; removes thickened and viscid mucus, and forms an ingredient in all children&apos;s medicines. As an external application, it is useful in swellings from cold, in itch or daad, expels wind, and decreases milk or semen; its corrector is <hi>Hubbeh senobir</hi>; its succedaneum thrice its weight of <hi>Sibr</hi> (aloes). Dose one direm.

<p id=p914><ab type=parNum>914</ab> <hi rend=sc>Missie</hi> <UR>msI</UR>.&mdash;A shrub of India, about a yard high; its branches thin and its leaves like the Kussowndie: its branches are knotted, and when slit open, an insect is found in them, which is given to the <hi>Boolbul</hi>, when training them to fight. Its flower is very small, of a reddish yellow, like the <hi>Gowzeban</hi>; it is also called the <hi>Kakjunga</hi>, q. v.

<pb id=pb153 n=153><p id=p915><ab type=parNum>915</ab> <hi rend=sc>Musoor</hi> <UR>msUr</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Adiess</hi>. A common grain of the pea tribe; cool, light, and astringent; useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood, and is sweet during digestion.

<p id=p916><ab type=parNum>916</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mustchagundka</hi> <UR>mschAknd"hkA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of sugar, useful in eruptions from diffused bile, seminal weakness, delirium, nausea, and thirst.

<p id=p917><ab type=parNum>917</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mukoond</hi> <UR>mknd</UR>.&mdash;Sweet to the taste; bitter in digestion; hot and dry; light; decreases corpulence; induces costiveness and wind; it is a kind of grain.

<p id=p918><ab type=parNum>918</ab> <hi rend=sc>Muggur</hi> <UR>mgr</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Tumsa</hi>. (The Alligator.) Its flesh is greasy and heavy; used in disorders of wind, and increases mucus and semen.

<p id=p919><ab type=parNum>919</ab> <hi rend=sc>Muko</hi> <UR>mkU</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Anbus saleb</hi>. P. <hi>Sugangoor</hi>. Very beneficial in swellings. Its juice is useful in increasing the eyesight, and for restraining the menstrual flux; cool and moist.

<p id=p920><ab type=parNum>920</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mug Peepul</hi> <UR>mgpypl</UR>.&mdash;A kind of Peepul.

<p id=p921><ab type=parNum>921</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moogta Sukut</hi> <UR>mktAskt</UR>.&mdash;A name for the shell of the pearl-oyster; it is sweet and pungent, used in mucous disorders, difficulty of breathing, pains of the chest and bowels, and loss of appetite.

<p id=p922><ab type=parNum>922</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moogtaphill</hi> <UR>mktAp-hl</UR>.&mdash;A name for the pearl.

<p id=p923><ab type=parNum>923</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mukhara</hi> <UR>mkxArA</UR>.&mdash;Commonly called <hi>Mukhana</hi>, <hi>Euryale ferox</hi>. It is cool and heavy, useful in disorders of wind, mucus, and blood; is aphrodisiac, and increases semen; and is found very beneficial to women after labor. It is often called <hi>Talmukhana</hi>, but it is quite a different medicine.

<p id=p924><ab type=parNum>924</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mullagheer</hi> <UR>mlAgyr</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree, the wood of which is very heavy, and full of veins. It is brought from a distance; when pounded, it is of a reddish black color, has fine smell, and is used in India for dying and for giving a pleasant odour to clothes. It is cardiac, strengthens the brain, and gives a pleasant effluvia to the perspiration; cures discolorations of the skin of the face, and in some Indian works is called a species of Sandal. Its properties are the same with <hi>Rukutchunden</hi>.

<pb id=pb154 n=154><p id=p925><ab type=parNum>925</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mulleka</hi> <UR>mlkA</UR>.&mdash;A kind of the flower of the <hi>Rai-bele</hi>: it is hot, light, aphrodisiac; cures disorders of wind, eruptions of the mouth, and all affections thereof.

<p id=p926><ab type=parNum>926</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mulleen</hi> <UR>mlyn</UR>.&mdash;A root of India, of a clay color; hot, dry, and pungent; if bruised and applied to the head, it kills vermin; it destroys maggots in ulcers; the leaves possess the same property. I knew a man who had severe head-aches from maggots in the brain: I squeezed the juice of this into the nose, it killed and brought them away.

<p id=p927><ab type=parNum>927</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moondie</hi> <UR>mn'dy</UR>.&mdash;A. <hi>Raderyoos</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Spheranthus Indicus.</hi>&rdquo; It is also called <hi>Tuppodenie</hi>, so denominated from its being used in penance; if any one preserves a constant respect for this, he will become the peculiar favorite of Heaven. It is also called <hi>Srawanie</hi>; this name is derived from the circumstance of its bearing fruit in the month <hi>Srawun</hi>. The leaf is somewhat like the mint, the flower round or globulated, and of a rose-color; it has a sweet smell, and is a medicine of great virtue. It is sweet and a little bitter, but very much so during digestion; it is hot, light; increases understanding; is vermifuge; useful in boils and eruptions of an obstinate nature; is pungent; cures pains in the parts of generation of the female, marasmus, gonorrh&oelig;a, and disorders of bile. If the plant be pulled out by the root before it flowers, and dried in the shade, and ate with wheat flour, cow&apos;s ghee, and sugar, it will restore and preserve youth, and prevent the hair from becoming grey; and if pounded and often used in powder, it will be found peculiarly tonic. If its seed be ate with sugar, it will preserve health to the extreme of old age.

<p>An old man is said to have eaten a preparation of this for a year constantly: the strength of youth was restored to him, and he lived to the age of 205 years. The physicians of India declare this to be the basis of the <hi>Elixir Vitæ</hi>. If the plant is taken before it flowers, and is bruised and eaten with ghee and honey, both the strength and appearance of youth will be preserved. Indeed, the extent of its virtues is only known to the most scientific of physicians. If its flowers are eaten for 40 days, the same effect will be produced; and the root used without intermission for <pb id=pb155 n=155>a year, incalculable benefit will be the result. If the root and leaves be bruised and eaten for three days, with cow&apos;s milk and honey, it will be found highly aphrodisiac. If one of the seeds be swallowed without water, the eye-sight will be preserved, and no affection of the eyes will take place for a year. If two are swallowed, the eye-sight will be preserved for two years, and <hi>so on</hi>. I used it myself in my infancy, or early days, and have preserved my sight in a wonderful manner. My uncle used the distilled water of this, in depression of the spirits, and as a cardiac, with great success: he sometimes distilled from equal parts of this and <hi>Gowjeban</hi>, at other times with other cardiac medicines. If half a masha of the oil of this be ate with <hi>Paan</hi> in the cold weather, it will produce a genial warmth over the body; it will also remove affections from cold, and be found aphrodisiac. The oil is thus procured:

<p>The plant is moistened with water, and then rubbed between the hands with any sweet-scented oil, but not too much; it is then to be extracted in the same manner as that of <hi>Agur</hi> is procured. If a chittack of the following oil be eaten daily for 40 days, and during this time abstaining from intercourse with woman, it will be found that the aphrodisiac power will have become so great, that it will seem wonderful. It is thus prepared:

<p>Take the leaves, root, and all parts of the plant; bruise them, sprinkling a little water over them; then squeeze out 20 seers of the juice, and add to it five seers of sweet oil; boil the whole till the juice shall have evaporated, and the residue is the oil. Some use the medicine in this manner. During the months of August and September, with cow&apos;s ghee. In April and May, with honey. In June and July, with sugar. In February and March, with congee. In October and November, with cow&apos;s milk; and in December and January, with sour milk. The author of the <hi>Dhara Shekoi</hi> has said that the root is to be bruised in a copper vessel, with a pestle of the Neeb tree, adding a little water, till it has become black; then taken up by dipping cotton into it, and preserved for use. In the ophthalmia, a little of the cotton moistened and applied to the eye, will remove the disease.


<pb id=pb156 n=156><p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Moondie</hi> is a medicine of India, of two kinds, a large and small; its flowers are like buttons, and it is of a bitterish, astringent taste. It is cool and dry in the 1st degree, and is, in the opinion of some, in equilibrium: both kinds of it are beneficial in disorders of the blood, white leprosy, epilepsy, heart-burn, elephantiasis, cough, incessant vomiting, diarrh&oelig;a, flatulence, all disorders of the eyes, feverish head-ache, itch, heat in the chest, marasmus, and all bilious disorders; it creates appetite, and is aphrodisiac.

<p id=p928><ab type=parNum>928</ab> <hi rend=sc>Munn</hi> <UR>mn</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Morh&oelig;marh</hi>. A. <hi>Hujuroolheya</hi>. A stone found in the nape of the neck of a snake of the Cobra species, but it is not found in all; when in the reptile, it is soft, but it hardens by exposure to the air. It has a variegated surface, and its virtues are these, that if rubbed on a blue or black woollen cloth, it will deprive the cloth of its color; also, if applied to any part bitten by a reptile, it will adhere till it shall have extracted the poison. If it be put into milk, it will change its color. If it is applied to the bite of a snake, it will extract the poison. And if it be eaten, no snake can ever by its bite produce hurtful effects on your system.

<p id=p929><ab type=parNum>929</ab> <hi rend=sc>Munsul</hi> <UR>mnsl</UR>.&mdash;Bitter, pungent, hot, and moist; heavy and aperient; an antidote to poisons; cures affections of mucus, blood, difficulty of breathing, and cough; clears the color of the skin, reduces corpulency; and removes possession by evil spirits. It is called <hi>Zernikh Soorkh</hi>. &ldquo;Red Sulphuret of Arsenic.&rdquo;

<p id=p930><ab type=parNum>930</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moondookpurnie</hi> <UR>mndkprny</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Birumbie</hi>.

<p id=p931><ab type=parNum>931</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mundar</hi> <UR>mndAr</UR>.&mdash;A small shrub, of two kinds; both bitter, pungent, hot, and laxative; useful in disorders of mucus, and increase of fat in the abdomen, itch, and swellings; and is an antidote to poisons.

<p id=p932><ab type=parNum>932</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moot</hi> <UR>mUt</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Shasha</hi>, or <hi>Kumeer</hi>. A. <hi>Bowl</hi>. Urine. That of cows, buffaloes, horses, goats, camels, rams, and men, is saltish and bitter; dry, light, aperient, and cardiac; increases appetite and relish for food; useful in general swellings; clears the brain and all excretory passages; increases bile; beneficial in disorders of wind, Badgola, piles, and dropsy; is vermifuge, and used in <pb id=pb157 n=157>Juzam, marasmus, flatulence, internal itchiness, and want of appetite.

<p>Cow&apos;s is the best and most effectual. Elephant&apos;s urine is an antidote to poisons, and generally vermifuge; useful in <corr sic=Jumaz>Juzam</corr> and Badgola. Buffalo&apos;s, beneficial in swellings, Badgola, piles, marasmus, and seminal weakness. Horse&apos;s is aperient; cures disorders of mucus, and <hi>Daad</hi>. Goat&apos;s is an antidote to poisons; removes difficulty of breathing, jaundice, and marasmus. Ram&apos;s cures emaciation, swellings, Juzam, piles, seminal weakness, and costiveness. Ass&apos;s is lithontriptic; useful in seminal weakness, Juzam, idiotism, internal itchiness, and dropsy, and is vermifuge.

<p>Human urine is an antidote to poison, and particularly tonic. When a choice is to be made between male and female, this rule may be observed. Of the cow, sheep, and goat, the female; of elephant, horse, camel, and ass, the male; also the male of the human subject. Should a person at any time feel symptoms of indigestion, and be afraid of the consequences, a little of his own urine will relieve all unpleasant sensations and expedite digestion, but this can only be resorted to by people of no caste.

<p id=p933><ab type=parNum>933</ab> <hi rend=sc><corr sic=Moonjee resp=errata>Monje</corr></hi> <UR>mUnjy</UR>.&mdash;The leaf and external fibrous covering of a kind of reed like grass, used to make rope. It is equally cold and hot; useful in acne, disorders of blood, diseases of the eyes, and all complaints affecting the urinary bladder, or urethra.

<p id=p934><ab type=parNum>934</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mooser</hi> <UR>mUsr</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, bitter, heavy; promotes appetite, cures piles and disorders of wind; increases semen, and is an ingredient in all tonic prescriptions. I fancy this is the <hi>Shukakool</hi>.

<p id=p935><ab type=parNum>935</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moocherus</hi> <UR>mUchyrs</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Bombax Heptaphyllum.</hi> The tree.&rdquo; The gum of the <hi>Sembill</hi> tree, also so named by the author of the <hi>Dhara Shekoi</hi>, but it is commonly understood to be the flower of the <hi>Soopearie</hi> tree. It is cool, heavy, and astringent; increases semen; restrains diarrh&oelig;a; increases the tone of the digestive organs; removes disorders of blood, bile, mucus, and general heat.


<pb id=pb158 n=158><p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Moocherus</hi> is of two kinds, one according to some is the gum of the <hi>Sahajena</hi>, and by the account of others, that of the <hi>Sembill</hi> tree. It is red, heavy, and difficult of digestion. The other kind is the flower of the <hi>Soopearie</hi>; both kinds are cool, dry, astringent, and aphrodisiac; strengthen the back, kidnies, and loins; increase semen, and lengthen aphrodisia. Its corrector is sugar and cow&apos;s ghee. The succedaneum is <hi>Kummarkuss</hi>.

<p id=p936><ab type=parNum>936</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mohuk</hi> <UR>mxk</UR> also <hi>Bohuk</hi>; useful in disorders of mucus and wind, and slightly increases bile; some have said that this is the <hi>Mowa</hi>.

<p id=p937><ab type=parNum>937</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mokhun</hi> <UR>mxkn</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree, hot and astringent; useful in diseases of wind and mucus, in worms in the stomach, and pain therefrom, rheumatic pains in the joints and bones, and its gum is aphrodisiac; increases the bulk of the muscles, and of use in disorders of bile and wind.

<p id=p938><ab type=parNum>938</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moong</hi> <UR>mUng</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Phaseolus Mungo.</hi>&rdquo; And one kind, which grows wild. It is cool, dry, light, and astringent; used in disorders of mucus and bile; strengthens the eyes, and is fit and proper food for the sick; it however weakens the stomach&mdash;this I know by experience. If given to a person of weak digestive organs, it will be passed unchanged, although other food will be digested. I therefore conclude that it is too difficult of assimilation to be used with advantage, as here recommended. It weakens aphrodisia. P. <hi>Maash</hi>.

<p id=p939><ab type=parNum>939</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moth</hi> <UR>mUt"h</UR>.&mdash;A grain of India; cool; some say in equilibrium. It is dry, quick of digestion, and if used with cow&apos;s ghee, its flavor will be much improved. It cleanses the blood, is sweet during digestion, relieves wind, and removes laxities of the bowels; some indeed have called it aperient: cures mucus disorders, strokes of the wind or sun, and removes fever. It produces worms.

<p id=p940><ab type=parNum>940</ab> <hi rend=sc>More</hi> <UR>mUr</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Peacock</hi>? Its flesh is hot, aphrodisiac, and tonic; beneficial in diseases of the ear, colds, dryness, and creates appetite; increases understanding, thickens the hair of the head, strengthens eye-sight, cleans the voice, and beautifies <pb id=pb159 n=159>the complexion. It ought to be ate in the cold season, as it is not so beneficial in the hot winds and rains. P. <hi>Taous</hi>.

<p id=p941><ab type=parNum>941</ab> <hi rend=sc>Morba</hi> <UR>mUrbA</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India. Its root hard, and of a clay color; hot and dry in the 2nd degree: used as an external application in swellings of the throat, and one direm of it eaten, it will loosen phlegm from the throat.

<p id=p942><ab type=parNum>942</ab> <hi rend=sc>Motha</hi> <UR>mUt-hA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cyperus rotundus.</hi> <hi>Cyperus pertenuis</hi>, Roxb.&rdquo; A name for Saad; bitter, astringent, and cool; inducing costiveness; assisting digestion; used in disorders of blood, mucus, bile, and fever; removes thirst, and is vermifuge.

<p id=p943><ab type=parNum>943</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moom</hi> <UR>mUm</UR>.&mdash;Soft and greasy, cures pain of bruises; and boils; assists the growth of granulations in wounds, and the junction of fractured bones; useful in affections of wind, blood, and Juzam. A. <hi>Shuma</hi>.

<p id=p944><ab type=parNum>944</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mookul.</hi> <UR>mUkl</UR>.&mdash;Restrains laxities of the bowels, is heavy and tonic; useful in disorders of bile and wind, creates appetite, and is very aphrodisiac.

<p id=p945><ab type=parNum>945</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moolie</hi> <UR>mUlI</UR> or <hi>Moolug</hi>.&mdash;Hot and light, creates appetite, clears the voice, benefits affections of the throat, the olfactory nerves, and the three secretions; dried, it is light and very beneficial in piles, swelling, stone and gravel. Salt extracted from the radish in the usual way, by being dried and burned, is diuretic; useful in suppressions of urine, and promotes digestion.

<p id=p946><ab type=parNum>946</ab> <hi rend=sc>Motie</hi> <UR>mUtI</UR>.&mdash;Its properties nearly resembling those of <hi>Chunder Kanth</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p947><ab type=parNum>947</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moonga</hi> <UR>mUngA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mirjhan</hi>; bitter and sweet; useful in disorders of bile, heat, wind, and mucus; increases semen and is cardiac.

<p id=p948><ab type=parNum>948</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mowlserie</hi> <UR>mUlsrI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Mimusops Elengi.</hi> <hi>Bukool</hi>, H. Sweet, astringent, and cool; causes intoxication, raises the spirits and is an antidote to poisons. Its flowers have a sweet smell; the fruit is cool, sweet, and astringent; improves the color of the skin, and imparts a pleasant taste to the mouth. I have found the fruit to be cardiac and stomachic; the root is beneficial in seminal weakness, in strengthening the loins, and increasing the consistence of semen. Its name is also <hi>Bowlserie</hi>.


<pb id=pb160 n=160><p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Bowlserie</hi> is cool and dry; its bark and root useful in thickening semen, and remedying too great seminal irritability: if its bark is boiled in milk, and as a gargle, it will remove tooth-ache. The flowers are somewhat hot, cardiac, and stomachic; its distilled water is intoxicating, and useful in disorders of bile, thirst, and delirium.

<p id=p949><ab type=parNum>949</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mooslee</hi> <UR>mUslI</UR> or <hi>Mooslicund</hi>.&mdash;Sweet and cool; removes bile and heat; increases a proper secretion of mucus, and if eaten with sweet oil, it will relieve discharges from the nose from cold. Used with rock salt, it will increase appetite; with water it will remove pains in the bowels. It is of several kinds: black and white. The former resembles the Shakakool, but the bark of the Shakakool is white, whereas this is black; the white kind is thin, and resembles <hi>Mahi roobyan</hi>, called also <hi>Mooslie Dukanee</hi>. Another kind is also white, and thinner than the black kind, yet thicker than the <hi>Dukanee</hi>. All three kinds are used in aphrodisiac formulæ; some have called it hot, and useful in piles and disorders of wind. If half a direm be taken with <hi>Zeera</hi>, it will be found beneficial in Jaundice; and if taken with equal parts of good ginger, it will cure indigestion. If eaten with the leaves of <hi>Punskisht</hi> in equal parts, it will remedy offensive perspiration, and with <hi>Streephill</hi>, it will remove seminal weakness; with <hi>Peepul</hi>, it will cure Hydrophobia, and with <hi>Anula</hi> it cures intermittents.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Mooslie</hi> is of two kinds, black and white; the black is called <hi>Mooslie Dukanee</hi>, dry in the first degree, and hot in the second; some say hot in the first degree and dry in the second. It is aphrodisiac, and increases semen; removes head-ache from phlegm and seminal weakness, (3 direms with as much of the white of the cocoanut.) In giddiness it is administered with honey; as a tonic with milk and <hi>Isgun</hi>; for injuries of the labiæ and vagina with <hi>Darfelfil</hi>; for carbuncle with <hi>Zemicund</hi>; for dropsy, with camel&apos;s milk or <hi>Mocoe</hi> water. As an antidote to poison, with <hi>Kawanch</hi> seed; in quartan ague, with cold water; in <hi>Soorkhbad</hi>, with <hi>Tirphilla</hi>; in habitual fever, with cow&apos;s urine; in pains in the <pb id=pb161 n=161>bowels, with hot-water; in the bite of a snake, with sugar, honey, or <hi>Tincar</hi>; in deafness, with mint or <hi>Kanjee</hi> for seven days; in black jaundice, with <hi>Baberung</hi>; and for gonorrh&oelig;a or diabetes, with water.

<p>In the opinion of the Hindoos, this is the best of all medicines, and the black kind the most powerful for medicinal purposes.

<p id=p950><ab type=parNum>950</ab> <hi rend=sc>Moorsheka</hi> <UR>mrshkA</UR>.&mdash;A tree, whose leaves growing like the plume of the peacock, has obtained for it this name. It is sweet and acid; useful in disorders of bile, wind, mucus, and heat.

<p id=p951><ab type=parNum>951</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mogra</hi> <UR>mgrA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Jasminum Zambac.</hi> <hi>Magorium.</hi>&rdquo; A flower very common; sweet and cool, and of a pleasant smell; raises the spirits; removes bile; improves weakness of sight, affections of the mouth, and ulcers. There are seven kinds of it.

<p id=p952><ab type=parNum>952</ab> <hi rend=sc>Musakunie</hi> <UR>msAknI</UR>.&mdash;A shrub of two kinds, the first rises only about four inches, more or less, and has on both sides of it two leaves, like a mouse; the other kind remains on the ground, like the leaf of the <hi>Doodie</hi>. Its flower is of a blue color; the first kind is scarce: both are hot, bitter, and diuretic, and useful in disorders of bile and mucus; it is called <hi>Murzunjoosh</hi>.

<p id=p953><ab type=parNum>953</ab> <hi rend=sc>Maha Moondie</hi> <UR>mxAmndI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Moondie</hi>, of a larger kind; its flower as large as the <hi>Kudum</hi> flower; its properties the same as the <hi>Bhoomkudum</hi>.

<p id=p954><ab type=parNum>954</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahwa</hi> <UR>mxUA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Bassia latifolia.</hi>&rdquo; A tree as large as the mangoe; its leaves large and thick; its wood used in building, very common to the eastward. A spirit is distilled from its flower; its fruit is named <hi>Kelownda</hi>; the unripe shell of it dressed with meat much improves its flavor. It is hot and dry. One kind of it is named <hi>Rahisphill</hi>. The decoction, the distilled water and spirit, have an offensive smell, produce giddiness, and much subsequent uneasiness. The flower when just blown is white, but as it becomes ripe assumes a yellow color like the <hi>Benowlee</hi>, but larger, and it is sweet to the taste. The kernel of its fruit gives an oil of a white color, and is used to adulterate ghee. Its properties are said to be, that it is useful in mucus and wind, and cicatrizes wounds.

<pb id=pb162 n=162><p>Its flower is cool and heavy; aphrodisiac; increases the secretion of milk and semen, also mucus; useful in disorders of bile, blood, wind, and in hectic fever. Called <hi>Goolchukan</hi>.

<p id=p955><ab type=parNum>955</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahkee</hi> <UR>mxkI</UR>.&mdash;Its flesh is sweet to the taste; hot and moist, also heavy; useful in disorders of wind, and has a soporific property. It is aphrodisiac, increases semen, strengthens memory, and preserves health. It is a name for the buffalo. A. <hi>Jamoos</hi>.

<p id=p956><ab type=parNum>956</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mohoka</hi> <UR>mxUkA</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cuculus Castaneus</hi>, Buch.&rdquo; A bird, the note of which is sounded <hi>okok</hi>, it is also called <hi>Uka</hi>. Its brain mixed with perfumes, and used as a cephalic in cases of palsy of the tongue, and paralysis, produces sneezing, and gives relief. Its blood is used to extract thorns or heads of arrows from the flesh. Its brain, mixed with sugar and given to children, produces distinct articulation. The flesh is said to be hot and dry, and to strengthen memory. Its fæces is used as a medicine in difficulty of breathing.

<p id=p957><ab type=parNum>957</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahaneem</hi> <UR>mxAnym</UR><corr>.</corr>&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Melia sempervirens</hi>,<corr sic="&rdquo;"></corr> W. The leaves of this species of the bead tree have a nauseous taste, devoid of astringency. Flem.&rdquo; Its taste is bitter and astringent; it is cool and dry; removes laxities of the bowels; useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood. Is vermifuge; allays vomiting and nausea, and is very powerful in Juzam. It is commonly called <hi>Bucaen</hi>. <hi>Shaikh Boo Ali Seyna</hi>, in his work called <hi>Kanoon</hi>, has written, that <hi>Azad</hi> is the name of a poisonous tree; and <hi>Hakeem Ally</hi> has written, that the <hi>Azad</hi> is the <hi>Bucaen</hi> tree; others too have followed him up, and stated it to be the <hi>Bucaen</hi>: but as I have repeatedly exhibited the <hi>Bucaen</hi>, I know that it possesses no poisonous qualities, consequently this must either be a mistake or a false statement. In the <hi>Moasoodie</hi>, it is written, that the <hi>Bucaen</hi> is a tree of India, cool, dry, astringent, vermifuge, beneficial in Juzam, eruptions, disorders of blood, and that it is lithontriptic. If three direms of the seed in powder be taken, it will be found useful in piles, and stop the discharge from bleeding piles; a fumigation of the seeds will also be found useful. The young leaves bruised and taken will correct an increased discharge of the menstrual flux; the leaves heated and applied to piles, or the loins in lumbago, will give great relief, <pb id=pb163 n=163>and as an application to boils it exceeds the Neem in virtue. The seeds bruised and rubbed among the hair will kill vermin; and the bark burnt, and with equal parts of <hi>Kuth</hi>, applied to the mouth, will cure eruptions.

<p id=p958><ab type=parNum>958</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mendi</hi> <UR>mxdI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Hinna</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Lawsonia Inermis</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p959><ab type=parNum>959</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahasutawurie</hi> <UR>mxAshtAUrI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Shatawur</hi>.

<p id=p960><ab type=parNum>960</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahawunth</hi> <UR>mxAUnt</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Kudum</hi>.

<p id=p961><ab type=parNum>961</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahameed</hi> <UR>m-hAmyd</UR>.&mdash;A species of this is called <hi>Meede</hi>. Both are cool, heavy, sweet to the taste; improve the senses; are powerfully tonic; increase milk and semen; are aphrodisiac, increase phlegm, cure eruptions from cold, cough from bile, but increase cough from phlegm. This medicine is very scarce, and seldom met with.

<p id=p962><ab type=parNum>962</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mahawur</hi> <UR>mxAbr</UR>.&mdash;Its properties come near those of the <hi>Lac</hi>. It is useful in discoloured specks on the face, and acne punctata; bruised and introduced into the ear, it cures the ear-ache.

<p id=p963><ab type=parNum>963</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mendi Anwul</hi> <UR>mndI AnUl</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Anwul</hi>.

<p id=p964><ab type=parNum>964</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mayursuka</hi> <UR>myUrskA</UR>.&mdash;Light; cures disorders of bile and mucus, and restrains laxities of the bowels.

<p id=p965><ab type=parNum>965</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mayoorshuka</hi> <UR>myUrshkA</UR>.&mdash;The <hi>Moorshuka</hi>.

<p id=p966><ab type=parNum>966</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mendha</hi> <UR>mnd-hA</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Meshe</hi>. Its flesh is heavy, moist, tonic; increases wind and bile. This is the name of the male, and his meat is preferable to the female. &ldquo;Ram.&rdquo;

<p id=p967><ab type=parNum>967</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mynphill</hi> <UR>myn p-hl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Gardenia Dumetorum</hi>, Köen. <hi>Vangueria Spinosa</hi>, Roxb.&rdquo; Bitter and hot, astringent and dry, light and emetic; useful in disorders of mucus and Juzam, swellings, flatulence, and dryness of the seven <hi>Dhats</hi>, <hi>Badgola</hi>, and is suppurating.

<p id=p968><ab type=parNum>968</ab> <hi rend=sc>Methie</hi> <UR>nytxI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Trigonella F&oelig;num-græcum</hi>, Wild.&rdquo; Hot and dry; <corr sic=exhilirates>exhilarates</corr> the spirits; creates appetite; induces costiveness; is vermifuge, and decreases semen. Its seed is useful in cough, nausea, and disorders of mucus. A. <hi>Hoolba</hi>.

<p id=p969><ab type=parNum>969</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mydhasingie</hi> <UR>myd-hsyngI</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Doodie</hi>.

<p id=p970><ab type=parNum>970</ab> <hi rend=sc>Myoorjung</hi> <UR>myUrjnk</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Aoloo</hi>; obtains its name from its stem resembling in straightness the peacock&apos;s leg.

<p id=p971><ab type=parNum>971</ab> <hi rend=sc>Meed</hi> <UR>myd</UR>.&mdash;Vide <hi>Mahameed</hi>.

<pb id=pb164 n=164><p id=p972><ab type=parNum>972</ab> <hi rend=sc>Meetanimboo</hi> <UR>my'txAnbU</UR>.&mdash;Called also, <hi>Rajenimboophill</hi>, and in P. <hi>Shukurleemboo</hi>.

<p id=p973><ab type=parNum>973</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nalee</hi> <UR>nAlI</UR> or <hi>Narie</hi>.&mdash;A small plant, which lies on the ground. Its leaves somewhat like the tamarind leaf. In some works the <hi>Narie</hi> is separately described. Its qualities are hot, and it is discutient; useful in affections of wind from cold; is laxative and beneficial in disorders of the mouth.

<p id=p974><ab type=parNum>974</ab> <hi rend=sc>Naryil</hi> <UR>nAry'yl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cocos nucifera.</hi>&rdquo; A tree like the <hi>Taar</hi> or <hi>Khoojoor</hi>; its fruit is oval, and betwixt that and its covering is a fibrous substance in considerable quantities; its weight from half a rittal to one or more. It is cool; slow of digestion; expels gravel; induces costiveness; is aphrodisiac and tonic; useful in disorders of wind, blood, bile, general heat; and its water is cool, light and cardiac; increases appetite and semen. If not quickly drunk, and has become fermented, it produces some degree of intoxication, raises the spirits, and is tonic. Its cheese, when first produced, resembles milk, and is said to be very sweet; it afterwards becomes hardened, and increases semen, wind, and disorders of bile. Bullienas, a physician, has related, that if a torch is made of the rind and coir, and burnt in the midst of a large company, it will produce so soporific an effect as to put them all to sleep.

<p id=p975><ab type=parNum>975</ab> <hi rend=sc>Naringee</hi> <UR>nArngI</UR>.&mdash;Some have stated this to be a name for <hi>Narinje</hi>, but this is a mistake; it is produced in Indostan. Its properties are less powerful than <hi>Sungterra</hi> or <hi>Kowla</hi>, but its acid greater.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Narinje</hi> is the <hi>Citrus Aurantium</hi>, or <hi>Nagaranga</hi>, San. Rind stomachic; juice acid and bitter.&rdquo;

<p id=p976><ab type=parNum>976</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nagesur</hi> <UR>nAgysr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Mesua ferrea.</hi>&rdquo; Indian rose <corr sic=chesnut>chestnut</corr>? A seed smaller than the <hi>Kubabcheenee</hi>; the plant is thin, and its stem long. It is dry, light, corrects indigested food; cures or removes offensive smell from the perspiration; useful in Juzam, acne, mucus, and poisons; it is said to be a name for <hi>Narmusk</hi>.

<p id=p977><ab type=parNum>977</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nagdown</hi> <UR>ngdUn"h</UR>.&mdash;<hi>Mugwort?</hi> Cures boils and eruptions, and is an antidote to the poison of spiders and snakes. A. <hi>Huleyoon</hi>, <hi>Artemisia Vulgaris</hi>.

<pb id=pb165 n=165><p id=p978><ab type=parNum>978</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nagdumnie</hi> <UR>ngdmnI</UR>.&mdash;A wood resembling a snake, from which it obtains its name. It coils round like the snake, and may easily be mistaken for that reptile. It is bitter; increases the size of the muscles; is tonic and light; used in disorders of bile and mucus, gonorrh&oelig;a, eruptions, Lues Venerea, and poisons; it remedies laxities of the bowels.

<p id=p979><ab type=parNum>979</ab> <hi rend=sc>Murdok</hi> <UR>mrdU'k</UR>.&mdash;A shrub, found in the hills; its leaves like those of the cucumber, its root called <hi>Davaun nemr</hi>. The leopard eats the root, which produces a swelling near its tail on the back: this is called <hi>Hadjurun nemr</hi>. P. <hi>Nirkpulung</hi>. This if bruised, and applied to the carbuncle, will expedite its cure; and if a woman applies it to the parts of generation, she will not conceive; and if her husband visits another woman after having been with her, she will not conceive. It is a runnet, and coagulates milk. If preserved about your person, and you visit a baker&apos;s shop, the bread will fall from the oven into the fire. It is about the size of a clove of garlic, and is variegated on its surface like the skin of the tiger.



<div1 id=noon>
<head><UR>n</UR></head>


<p id=p980><ab type=parNum>980</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nadey</hi> <UR>nAdI</UR>.&mdash;A species of <hi>Jamin</hi>.

<p id=p981><ab type=parNum>981</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nagarmotha</hi> <UR>nAgrmUt-hA</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Motha</hi>. <hi>Cyperus Pertenuis.</hi>

<p id=p982><ab type=parNum>982</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nagbulla</hi> <UR>nAgblA</UR>.&mdash;Sweet, acid, and astringent; hot and slow of digestion; useful in itch and ulcers, also in disorders of bile.

<p id=p983><ab type=parNum>983</ab> <hi rend=sc>Naa&oelig;</hi> <UR>nA'yI</UR>.&mdash;A common shrub, very hot; useful in disorders of wind and mucus; produces appetite; assists digestion. Its leaves used as a culinary vegetable.

<p id=p984><ab type=parNum>984</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nirbissie</hi> <UR>nrbsI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Jedwar</hi>. &ldquo;<hi>Curcuma Zedoaria.</hi> <hi>Amomum Zedoaria.</hi> <hi>Kempferia Rotunda.</hi>&rdquo; Sp. ch. Spikes lateral, bulbs small, with long yellow palmated tubers; leaves broad-lanceolar, sub-sessile on their sheath, sericeous underneath; color uniform green. <hi>Banhildie</hi>; pungent and cool; useful in disorders of wind, mucus, blood, and every kind of poison. Is tonic; carminative; useful in flatulent cholic, but it increases ulcers.

<p id=p985><ab type=parNum>985</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nerkutchoor</hi> <UR>nrkchUr</UR>.&mdash;See <hi>Kutchoor</hi>.

<p id=p986><ab type=parNum>986</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nergoondie</hi> <UR>nrgUndI</UR>.&mdash;Resembles <hi>Rootki</hi>, but smaller and black. The author of the <hi>Ulfaz</hi> has without due enquiry pronounced <pb id=pb166 n=166>this to be the <hi>Sumhaloo</hi>, but this is a different plant. It is hot and dry, useful in disorders of mucus.

<p id=p987><ab type=parNum>987</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neyrmellie</hi> <UR>nrmlI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Strychnos Potatorum</hi>, W. <hi>Cataca</hi>, San.&rdquo; It is cool and dry, some say it is in equilibrium. If bruised and mixed with foul water, it will clear, and purify it. If bruised in water, and applied to the umbilicus, it will relieve the griping pain of dysentery. If bruised, and applied to the eyes, it will strengthen eye-sight; also if applied to the bite of a snake, it will remove the effects of the poison. If eight grains of it be mixed with a little water and sugar, and drank, it will be found beneficial in gonorrh&oelig;a. I have seen this in my uncle&apos;s receipt book, but the dose was not there specified. If four grains of this be bruised in water, and mixed with dhaie, and left in a covered China vessel for a night, and taken in the morning, it will relieve suppression of urine, gonorrh&oelig;a, <corr sic="and cherdee" resp=errata>chordee</corr>, and bloody urine; but it must be used for a week.

<p id=p988><ab type=parNum>988</ab> <hi rend=sc>Niswut</hi> <UR>nsUt</UR> or <hi>Mahaseyama</hi>, or <hi>Ritchita</hi>. It is a little bitter and sweet; also bitter during digestion. It is hot and dry; laxative; relieves wind; useful in fever, disorders of bile, mucus, dropsy, and swellings. The black kind is a poison and very hurtful; it is a powerful drastic purgative; produces insensibility, heat, giddiness, and injures the voice.

<p id=p989><ab type=parNum>989</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nuk</hi> <UR>n'k</UR> Is of two kinds, both sweet to the taste; hot and light; removes possession by evil spirits; beneficial in disorders of wind, mucus, and blood; is an antidote to poisons; cardiac, and clears the complexion, called <hi>Uzfarooteeb</hi>.

<p id=p990><ab type=parNum>990</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nukchecknie</hi> <UR>nk chknI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Koondush</hi>. It is a low shrub, does not rise from the ground; its leaves like the <hi>Tirrateruk</hi>; its flower like the <hi>Neemb</hi>. It produces eruptions in the mouth, beneficial in disorders of wind and phlegm, and is vermifuge. It is called <hi>Chicknie</hi>.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Maadentezerrubad.</hi>

<p><hi>Nukchikenie</hi> is a medicine of India, hot and dry; expels wind; beneficial in mucus, paralysis, and paralytic complaints, loss of memory, pains in the joints, and is aphrodisiac. If one seer of this with quarter seer of sweet oil, and half the weight of <hi>Mulkungnie</hi>, be put into an earthen vessel, and its oil extracted <pb id=pb167 n=167>in the manner described under the head Puttaljuntur, and given in the quantity of four soorkhs in Paan, it will be useful in all the above-mentioned complaints, and in all mucous disorders. It will be advisable to use this medicine only in the cold weather, as it is, in itself, very hot and powerful.

<p id=p991><ab type=parNum>991</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nullwa</hi> <UR>nlUA</UR>.&mdash;Cool; strengthens the eye-sight; useful in bilious disorders, affections of the blood, Juzam, difficulty of voiding urine, general heat, mucus, and acne.

<p id=p992><ab type=parNum>992</ab> <hi rend=sc>Null</hi> <UR>nl</UR> or <hi>Nullie</hi>; grows in watery and moist places; it is cool, and useful in disorders of the eyes, in eruptions of the mouth or apthæ; clears the blood; clears and dries the vagina, and is diuretic. Some have called it heating.

<p id=p993><ab type=parNum>993</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nemuk Chitchera</hi> <UR>nmk ch-chyrA</UR> Is thus made. Take two bundles of that kind of <hi>Chitchera</hi>, which has inverted prickles, reduce it to ashes, and collect them into a vessel; then add a great quantity of water, and mix and wash it well with the hand; leave it for a night, add more water, put it into a cloth, and let it strain through slowly by drops; boil the clear fluid till the salt will precipitate or crystallize.

<p id=p994><ab type=parNum>994</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nemuk Soonchur</hi> <UR>nmk snchr</UR> also called <hi>Nemuk Sia</hi>. &ldquo;Muriate of soda. <hi>Bitlaban.</hi> <hi>Kala Nemuck</hi>, H.&rdquo; A tonic in dyspepsia or gout; a deobstruent in obstructions of the spleen and mysenteric glands of children; a stimulant in chronic rheumatism and palsy; a vermifuge. An analysis of the black salt gave,

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Black oxide of iron, six grains</hi>; <hi>sulphur, 14 grains</hi>; <hi>muriate of lime, 12 grains</hi>; <hi>muriate of soda, 444 grains</hi>; <hi>loss four grains = 480 grains</hi>.&rdquo; It is thus prepared: Take two seers of <hi>Anula</hi>, one seer of <hi>Ashkhur</hi>, bruise both and mix them with 20 seers of rock-salt, also bruised; put the whole into a vessel, cover the vessel with a cloth, all except the mouth; lute this cloth well with soft clay, and place it in the sun to dry. When perfectly dry, put it on the fire, (let the mouth of the vessel be rather small.) Keep constantly stirring it with an iron spatula or spoon; when well boiled and mixed, take it off and allow it to cool; then add <hi>Tinkhar</hi>, <hi>Jawakhar</hi>, <hi>Tilkh</hi>, <hi>Kibreeth</hi>, sweet <hi>salt</hi>, and <hi>soot</hi>, equal parts; mix all well together, and <pb id=pb168 n=168>add a quantity of salt-water; then boil the whole down, and strain as directed under the head Nemuk <hi>Chitchera</hi>.

<p id=p995><ab type=parNum>995</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nemuk Kutchloon</hi> <UR>nmk kchlUn</UR>.&mdash;The salt of glass, called <hi>Muskhoo Koonia</hi>, also <hi>Zoobdat ul Kawareer</hi>. It is the froth of glass; it creates appetite; clears the blood: there is another kind of salt called <hi>Budhloon</hi>. This is hot and stomachic; restrains laxities of the bowels, pains, and consequent swellings of the urinary bladder, heaviness, and stuffing of the chest, disorders of wind and mucus; also expels wind.

<p id=p996><ab type=parNum>996</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nemuk Udhbidh</hi> <UR>nmk 'Ad-hbd"h</UR>.&mdash;The common <hi>Unkaloon</hi>; this is a kind of black salt; it is light; clears the blood; it is speedy in its effects, and as an external application, and it expels wind.

<p id=p997><ab type=parNum>997</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nemuk S&oelig;ndha</hi> <UR>nmk synd-hA</UR>.&mdash;Sweet to the taste; cool, moist, and light; promotes appetite and digestion. Is cardiac, strengthens vision, and is useful in wind and bile.

<p id=p998><ab type=parNum>998</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nekund Baaperi</hi> <UR>nkndbAprI</UR>.&mdash;A medicine of India, called also <hi>Oontura</hi> or <hi>Anere</hi>. It is hot and moist. If used as much as can be held in the palm of the hand, for a year, no poison will prove hurtful; in fact it counteracts the poison of snakes, and all other poisons. If two direms be eaten with as much aniseseed, for six months, the hair will not become white; two direms ate with dhaie, will be found effectual in gonorrh&oelig;a. Eaten with the leaves of the lime tree, and four seeds of peepul, it will cure obstinate fevers; with goat&apos;s milk, will cure quartans; with <hi>Foifil</hi> for three months, will cure white leprosy, also foulness of the blood, Juzam, boils, and scabies.

<p id=p999><ab type=parNum>999</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nundbyrchun</hi> <UR>n0ndbyrchn</UR> or <hi>Nundbyrkha</hi>. Hot and light, and in its properties resembling the peepul; indeed it is reckoned a species of that tree. It is useful in disorders of mucus, blood, poisons, boils, and cuticular eruptions.

<p id=p1000><ab type=parNum>1000</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nunahuld</hi> <UR>n-nA-hld</UR>.&mdash;The small turmeric, called also <hi>Mameeran</hi>.

<p id=p1001><ab type=parNum>1001</ab> <hi rend=sc>Newarrie</hi> <UR>nyUArI</UR>.&mdash;A flower in India, like the <hi>Chumbeley</hi>, but has no smell. It is of two kinds, one procured in the hot season, the other in the rains; the second kind is also called <hi>Newalie</hi>. Both are pungent, light, and useful in disorders of all the secretions.

<pb id=pb169 n=169><p id=p1002><ab type=parNum>1002</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nowsader</hi> <UR>nUsAdr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;Muriate of Ammonia. <hi>Sal Ammoniac</hi>, F. <hi>Salmiak</hi>, G. <hi>Sale Ammoniaco</hi>, I. <hi>Sal Ammoniaco</hi>, Sp. Also <hi>Nowshader</hi><corr>&rdquo;</corr>; very pungent salt, and as a medicine or application, speedily effectual. It is aperient, beneficial in cholics, dropsy, costiveness, and pains in the bowels.

<p id=p1003><ab type=parNum>1003</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nowllee</hi> <UR>nUlI</UR>.&mdash;The young leaves of the lime tree; they have a sweet and grateful smell.

<p id=p1004><ab type=parNum>1004</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neeturbala</hi> <UR>nytrbAlA</UR>.&mdash;Cool, dry, and light; produces appetite and digestion; cures eruptions of diffused bile; bilious and mucous disorders, general heat, boils, and eruptions. Some say, that this is the <hi>Nalee</hi>, but this is a mistake, for Nalee is the name of a different medicine, though it may be that of both. As the <hi>Neeturbala</hi> is seldom met with, a substitute is used in the branches of the <hi>Neelophir</hi>, dried.

<p id=p1005><ab type=parNum>1005</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neela Totha</hi> <UR>nylAtUt-hA</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Tootia Subs</hi>. It is of two kinds, both aperient, and useful in scabies and Juzam, disorders from poison, and mucus; is vermifuge; reduces corpulency, and is useful in certain diseases of the eye.

<p id=p1006><ab type=parNum>1006</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neenuk</hi> <UR>nynk</UR>.&mdash;Its flesh is sweet to the taste; light, tonic, and aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of the three secretions. It is a kind of <hi>Barasingha</hi>.

<p id=p1007><ab type=parNum>1007</ab> <hi rend=sc>Newla</hi> <UR>nyUlA</UR>.&mdash;In its properties resembling those of the cat. A. <hi>Ibn Urs</hi>. &ldquo;The mongoose, <hi>Ichneumon</hi>, <hi>Viverra Ichneumon</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p1008><ab type=parNum>1008</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neelkunt</hi> <UR>nyl kn't-h"h</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Coracias Bengalensis.</hi>&rdquo; A bird; its meat is useful in disorders of mucus, wind, and blood. P. <hi>Subsuk</hi>.

<p id=p1009><ab type=parNum>1009</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neendie</hi> <UR>nyndI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Vitex Nigundo</hi>, W. <hi>Lagondium Litorium</hi>, Rump. <hi>Bhemnosi</hi>, Rheede. <hi>Vitex Trifolia.</hi> The leaves heated are discutient, effectual in dispelling inflammatory swellings of the joints from acute rheumatism, and of the testicles from suppressed gonorrh&oelig;a.&rdquo;

<p id=p1010><ab type=parNum>1010</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neela Sindhuk</hi> <UR>nylAsnd-hk</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Sumhaloo</hi>, (<hi>Sobaloo?</hi>) P. <hi>Punjkysht</hi>. A kind of the above; both are bitter to the taste, astringent, pungent, and light; increase knowledge; strengthen vision; also strengthen the hair of the head; remove itchiness of the abdomen and swellings; are vermifuge; useful in Juzam, boils, eruptions, and disorders of mucus; improve appetite, and relieve cataract. The leaves of the Sumhaloo, smoked as tobacco, <pb id=pb170 n=170>or equal parts of them and tobacco bruised and applied to the part, will cure hydrocele.

<p id=p1011><ab type=parNum>1011</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nypaul</hi> <UR>nypAl</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Chureyta</hi>, called also <hi>Nupaul Neeb</hi>.

<p id=p1012><ab type=parNum>1012</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neenboo</hi> <UR>nynbU</UR>.&mdash;P. <hi>Lymboo</hi>. <hi>Citrus Medica</hi>, W. <hi>Jambira</hi>, S. Refrigerant, antiseptic. Peel stomachic. <hi>The Lime.</hi> It ripens in the hot-weather, and attains the size of a hen&apos;s egg. It is of a green yellowish color. Its rind is very thin, and thence it derives its name Kagsi. One kind of it is always in fruit, and a sweet kind of it is called <hi>Rajineenboo phill</hi>. Its properties are particularly noticed in Yunani works. It is said in some publications to be an antidote to animal poisons, both internally used, and applied to the parts.

<p id=p1013><ab type=parNum>1013</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neel</hi> <UR>nyl</UR>.&mdash;The indigo, very common in India; hot and bitter; useful in boils, affections of the spleen, Soorkhbad, dropsy, strengthening the hair of the head; but it weakens memory, and produces giddiness.

<p>Its leaves are used as an application for colouring the hair, and are in great estimation on that account. From its heating quality, it either decreases or increases a discharge from the nose, according to its nature; and when it is used for colouring the hair of the beard, cloves ought to be mixed with it, to increase its heating quality, when the person is of a cold temperament.

<p id=p1014><ab type=parNum>1014</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neelisbund</hi> <UR>nylys bnd</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Apirchetta</hi>, q. v.

<p id=p1015><ab type=parNum>1015</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neeb</hi> <UR>nyb</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Melia Azedirachta</hi>, W. The pride of India, the leaves of a nauseous bitter taste, (devoid of astringency,) Flem.&rdquo;

<p>A very common and large tree of India, much esteemed; it is of four kinds, the medicinal properties of all the same. It is astringent and bitter; pungent and cool, (some say hot and dry;) some call its qualities in equilibrium; it is quick of digestion; useful in disorders of bile, wind, and mucus, and I have known it to be of use in Juzam and white leprosy. I have also exhibited it with success in eruptions and scabies. One man I knew, whose whole body was white from leprosy. I prescribed it to him for 40 days, and cured him. I took the kernel of the <pb id=pb171 n=171>seed, bruised and sifted it, and gave it in the quantity that might be contained in the palm of his hand, fasting, and prohibited him from using any other kind of food than bread or <hi>dhal</hi>, without salt or ghee.

<p>It is also said by <hi>Hukeem Ali</hi> to be excellent in curing obstinate old ulcers, as also fistula in ano, by the application of its leaves. It is given in many and various ways. Its leaves are given fresh, sometimes dried and pounded, sometimes its juice is given, often the juice of the leaf buds, and not unfrequently its bark. It is likewise given mixed with <hi>Noora</hi>. Its juice is used with <hi>Noora</hi> to cleanse foul ulcers, and to cure carbuncle, and this it effects in a very short time. The <hi>Noora</hi> is added to it in one-eighth of its quantity, and <hi>Hukeem Ali</hi> has declared it to be the best ingredient in ointment that he ever tried.

<p>I have often used the leaves heated as an application to swellings and boils; it in some cases resolved them, in others expedited suppuration, and in all was beneficial. I have added salt to the bruised leaves for the same purpose, and found that it added to its efficacy.

<p>A decoction of the leaves as a fumigation is excellent in discussing swellings, and with the addition of the leaves of the Sumhaloo, with additional good effect. A fumigation of less heating properties may be obtained by the leaves of the <hi>Anbassaleb</hi>, being substituted for the <hi>Sumhaloo</hi>. The water of this decoction is useful in cleansing foul ulcers, and removing pain from the joints.

<p>The <hi>Neeb</hi> in the opinion of Indian physicians is cool, and <hi>Hukeem Urzanee</hi> has described its qualities as equal. If the decoction is used as a wash for the hair, it will darken its color, and increase its growth; and if the juice of its young leaves in the quantity of five or six direms be taken for seven days, it will cure scabies, ring-worm, and all kinds of acne, and it will purify the blood. A decoction of the bark of its root will restore suppressed menses, and if taken with goor it will produce abortion: prepared in this manner it will cure the under-mentioned diseases.

<pb id=pb172 n=172><p>Take of the flower, seed, bark of the root, and leaves (called <hi>Punjuk</hi>), let them be infused for a night in two maunds of water, then bury it in the ground for a month, after which distil its water for use.

<p>All species of scabies, white leprosy, Juzam, (when not too far advanced,) and disorders of all the secretions. Some mix the <hi>Punjuk</hi> of the <hi>Bucaen</hi> with the above, and it is said to increase its virtues. If the seed be bruised in water, and applied to the head, it will remove head-ache. Its juice is vermifuge. If three masha of the leaf buds with half masha of black peepul be eaten for 21 days, it will remove disorders and foulness of blood; increase the strength of vision, and by its juice being introduced into the eyes, will cure night-blindness.

<p>I have given it for cleansing the blood, correcting vitiated bile, scabies, idiotism, and all disorders arising from disordered bile, thus: By mixing the distilled water, above-mentioned, with filings of <hi>Sissoo</hi>, the leaves, flowers, and bark of the <hi>Bucaen</hi>, and <hi>Shatirra</hi>, and <hi>Surphonka</hi>, white Sandal, filed, and <hi>Gowzeban</hi>, mixed well, and a water distilled. It will also be found useful in Juzam and white leprosy<corr sic=", with great good effect" resp=errata></corr>.

<p id=p1016><ab type=parNum>1016</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neelobe</hi> <UR>nylUbI</UR>.&mdash;<hi>The Saruss.</hi>

<p id=p1017><ab type=parNum>1017</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neelgau</hi> <UR>nyl gAU</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The <hi>Wild Cow</hi>, (a species of <hi>Elk</hi>.<corr sic="&rdquo;)">)&rdquo;</corr> Its size is somewhat between a horse and ass. Its meat is greasy, hot, and moist; sweet; increases the secretion of semen; also bile, and eruptions of the apthous kind. It is also called <hi>Rooja</hi>. A. <hi>Bakur ul Vaish</hi>.

<p id=p1018><ab type=parNum>1018</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nainjooth</hi> <UR>nyn jUt</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Mameeran</hi>.

<p id=p1019><ab type=parNum>1019</ab> <hi rend=sc>Neelkunti</hi> <UR>nyl kn'tI</UR>.&mdash;A small shrub of India; its leaves thick in a middling degree; its root and flower is blue: also another kind, which grows in gardens, is called by this name. Its properties are not known to me.


<div1 id=vav>
<head><UR>U</UR></head>


<p id=p1020><ab type=parNum>1020</ab> <hi rend=sc>Vaasun</hi> <UR>UAsn</UR>.&mdash;Called also <hi>Bootee Shaikh Fureed</hi>, which also signifies a hill.

<p id=p1021><ab type=parNum>1021</ab> <hi rend=sc>Vcherkhar</hi> <UR>Uchrk-hAr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Nowshakur</hi>, also <hi>Nowshader</hi>; some call this a composition, and some say it is the salt <hi>Zakoom</hi>, made by the branches being cut small, burnt, and prepared.

<pb id=pb173 n=173><p id=p1022><ab type=parNum>1022</ab> <hi rend=sc>Veedoorie</hi> <UR>UydUrI</UR> also <hi>Bedoorie</hi>. A. <hi>Ynoolhur</hi>. It is commonly known by the name <hi>Sahroonia</hi>; hot, acid, and useful in cholics.

<p id=p1023><ab type=parNum>1023</ab> <hi rend=sc>Veroojun</hi> <UR>UrUjn</UR>.&mdash;Also <hi>Beroojun</hi>. The author of the <hi>Kasmi</hi> has described this as a small stone, or a name for any small stone; some describe it as a kind of <hi>Jewaheer</hi>.


<div1 id=heh>
<head><UR>h</UR></head>


<p id=p1024><ab type=parNum>1024</ab> <hi rend=sc>Harsinghar</hi> <UR>hA'rsnk-hAr</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis</hi>;&rdquo; also called <hi>Hursinghar</hi>. It grows to about a man&apos;s height, and when at the very highest, is about 12 feet, though some have seen it even higher. Its leaves are pointed, thick, and hard; its flowers small and white; their stem red. Its leaves rubbed on ring-worm cure the affection: first scaling the part, then healing. It is cool and light; useful in disorders of wind, mucus, and bile. It is aphrodisiac, and re-unites broken bones.

<p id=p1025><ab type=parNum>1025</ab> <hi rend=sc>Haloon</hi> <UR>hAlUn</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The seed of the <hi>Cress</hi>, or <hi>Lepidium Sativum</hi>.&rdquo; The seed of the <hi>Agur</hi>; it is smaller than the seed of the <hi>Tookbalingha</hi>, but thicker, and of a red color; it is aphrodisiac and tonic; removes hiccup, wind, mucus, and disorders of the blood. It is hot and dry. A. <hi>Hurf</hi>.

<p id=p1026><ab type=parNum>1026</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hudhjora</hi> <UR>hA'rjU'rA</UR>.&mdash;The flower of the <hi>Hursinghar</hi>; it produces the re-union of fractured bones, from which property it derives its name. &ldquo;<hi>Cissus quadrangularis.</hi>&rdquo;

<p id=p1027><ab type=parNum>1027</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hoorhoora</hi> <UR>hU'r-hU'rA</UR>.&mdash;A small plant, with many flowers, of a white color, and very small: one kind of it is called <hi>Burumseerjela</hi>. The first kind is cool, heavy, and diuretic; useful in disorders of mucus and wind. The second is hot and light; useful in seminal weakness and fever; and is lithontriptic, and removes difficulty of voiding urine.

<p id=p1028><ab type=parNum>1028</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hurunkherie</hi> <UR>hrn k-hyrI</UR> or <hi>Hurunkhoorie</hi>. A small plant of India; its leaves resembling a deer&apos;s hoof, which has given it this title. It is usually found in wheat fields; it is hot, and aperient; useful in scabies, Juzam, and loss of sensation. If one direm fresh be eaten with 10 grains of black-pepper, bruised, daily, it will restore lost sensation.

<p id=p1029><ab type=parNum>1029</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hurtaal</hi> <UR>hrtAl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;The yellow Sulphuret of Arsenic. <hi>Orpiment.</hi>&rdquo; Pungent and astringent; hot and dry; useful in disorders from poison, scabies, Juzam, aphthæ, disorders of the <pb id=pb174 n=174>blood, mucus and bile, fever, and possession with evil spirits. It is a common application in scabies, and is called Zernikh Zerd. It is of five kinds, yellow, red, green, white, and black. The yellow is called Hurtaal, and the white kind is used by alchymists in the transmutation of metals; it is in the opinion of every one hot and dry in the 3rd or 4th degree; its corrector is milk and cow&apos;s ghee; its dose four ratties, after it is killed or prepared, and is thus much esteemed as a medicine in disorders from cold, such as paralysis, epilepsy, affections of the joints, Juzam, and white leprosy. It is aphrodisiac, and increases appetite and digestion.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>It is thus prepared for use in Leprosy.</hi>

<p>Take one tolah of yellow arsenic, wash it seven times in milk, then grind it for 24 hours, adding as it dries, a little milk, then let it dry a little, and make it up into small pills. Then take half seer of the <hi>Bhurr Tree</hi> (the bark), pound it, and put it in a vessel, and among the powder put the pills with a little <hi>Chunam</hi> (lime), above and below them; after this, shut the vessel so well up that no smoke can escape, put it on the fire, and keep it in a strong heat for six hours; then opening the vessel, pour in over the pills a little ghee (butter), to cool them. The dose will be one <hi>soorkh</hi> daily, for seven days, abstaining from any thing salt.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Another method.</hi>

<p>Take half a tolah of <hi>Hurtaal Tubki</hi>, bruise it, and grind it with milk or the juice of the castor; form it into pills as above. Then take of <hi>Dharafilfil</hi> half a tolah, bruise, and use it in lieu of the chunam above alluded to; form the pile of 15 pieces of cow-dung in a hole dug in the ground, on these lay the pills, supported and covered with the <hi>Dharafilfil</hi>; over them place an equal number of pieces of cow-dung, and set fire to the whole. When it is cold, take out the pills, and preserve them for use. Dose half Soorkh.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Another method.</hi>

<p>Take of the <hi>Hurtaal</hi> half a direm, bruise and grind it with the juice of the <hi>Kobee</hi>, for six hours, then form it into pills, place them in an earthern vessel well luted, then surround it <pb id=pb175 n=175>with 10 pounds of dried cow-dung, set it on fire, and when cool, remove them. The dose one grain or barley corn. Salt prohibited. Given in Paan.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Another method.</hi>

<p>Take of <hi>Hurtaal</hi> half a direm, tie it up in a cloth, and let it remain for seven days in cow&apos;s urine, again for the like period in lime juice, and an equal number of days in milk of <hi>Mudar</hi>. The two first liquids are during the seven days to be twice changed, the last changed daily; then take out the <hi>Hurtaal</hi>, and grind it with milk of <hi>Mudar</hi> for six hours, form them into pills, and roast them as recommended in the two foregoing methods. The dose the same.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Another method.</hi>

<p>Take of <hi>Hurtaal</hi> one direm, the kernel of the <hi>Kurinjua</hi> one direm, <hi>Alum</hi> one direm; first bruise the <hi>Kurinjua</hi> and strew the half of it over an earthern vessel, with equal parts of <hi>Shibyemánie</hi>; then put over it the <hi>Hurtaal</hi>, and above that the alum; above all these, put the remainder of the <hi>Kurinjua</hi>; secure the whole as in the last method, and roast with 14 pounds of the dried cow-dung.

<p id=p1030><ab type=parNum>1030</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hyrbee</hi> <UR>hyrbI</UR>.&mdash;A root of a yellow color; hot, dry, and aperient; useful in disorders of bile, mucus, and viscidities of the secretions; its dose is from one dang. to half a direm.

<p id=p1031><ab type=parNum>1031</ab> <hi rend=sc>Harun</hi> <UR>hArn</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Myrg</hi>.

<p id=p1032><ab type=parNum>1032</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hurr</hi> <UR>h'r</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Terminalia Chebula</hi>, W. The unripe fruit <hi>Zengi Hur</hi>, H. <hi>Myrobalans</hi>, <hi>Terminalia Citrina</hi>.&rdquo; A name for <hi>Hulélá</hi>; its properties particularly described in Yunani works: astringent, sweet, laxative. Dose one of the fruits.

<p id=p1033><ab type=parNum>1033</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hurbarheorhi</hi> <UR>h'rbA'ryUrI</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Averrhoa acida</hi>, Linn. <hi>Cicca disticha</hi>, Gmel. <hi>Phyllanthus Cheramela</hi>, Roxb.&rdquo;

<p>Or <hi>Húrfúrhéorhi</hi>; a common plant; the acid fruit of which is used for preserves.

<p id=p1034><ab type=parNum>1034</ab> <hi rend=sc>Husthkool</hi> <UR>hstx"hkUl</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Baer</hi>, of a middling size.

<p id=p1035><ab type=parNum>1035</ab> <hi rend=sc>Husthal</hi> <UR>hstxAl</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Pendhaloo</hi>.

<p id=p1036><ab type=parNum>1036</ab> <hi rend=sc>Husthuk</hi> <UR>hstxk</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Arnd</hi>.

<p id=p1037><ab type=parNum>1037</ab> <hi rend=sc>Husthchinkhar</hi> <UR>hstx"hchnkxAr</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Kharkhusuk</hi>.

<p id=p1038><ab type=parNum>1038</ab> <hi rend=sc>Huldee</hi> <UR>hldy</UR> called also <hi>Huld</hi>; it is pungent and bitter, <pb id=pb176 n=176>hot and dry; useful in disorders of mucus, bile, blood, acne, seminal weakness, swellings, marasmus, and boils. It may be applied in small quantities externally, bruised, for the cure of bruises. P. <hi>Zerdchooba</hi>. A kind of this is called <hi>An&apos;bèhuldie</hi>, &ldquo;<hi>Curcuma longa</hi>.&rdquo;

<p id=p1039><ab type=parNum>1039</ab> <hi rend=sc>Huldia</hi> <UR>hldyA</UR>.&mdash;The name of a yellow poison; vide <hi>Hurtaal</hi>.

<p id=p1040><ab type=parNum>1040</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hoolhool</hi> <UR>hUl hUl</UR>.&mdash;&ldquo;<hi>Cleome viscosa.</hi>&rdquo; A plant, about a yard high, more or less; its leaves are small and thin towards the branches; its seed-vessel is very thin, and contains numerous small black seeds. It is round, and bent in the centre; it is used as a culinary vegetable. It is hot and pungent; useful in cholic, dropsy, ulcers, and ear-aches; swellings, Juzam, and white leprosy. Its leaves, introduced into the ear, very useful in ear-ache. It is also beneficial in the piles; the parts being washed with a decoction of its leaves. In this complaint, the leaves are dressed and eaten with rice; five direms of seed ate with twice its weight of sugar before meals, and the meal to consist of <hi>Kitcheree</hi>, with plenty of ghee, (butter,) used for 40 days, will effectually remove piles.

<p id=p1041><ab type=parNum>1041</ab> <hi rend=sc>Huldoo</hi> <UR>hldU</UR>.&mdash;The name of a tree; the wood of which is used in buildings; its properties mentioned under the head <hi>Darhuld</hi>.

<p id=p1042><ab type=parNum>1042</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hingote</hi> <UR>hngU't</UR>.&mdash;A tree; hot in its properties; useful in Juzam, boils, and eruptions; is an antidote to poisons, and to possession by evil spirits; beneficial in white leprosy and worms in the stomach. Its fruit is the size of the large <hi>Hurrh&oelig;</hi>, and even larger, though when dried it remains about that size. The tree is about the size of a small <hi>Neeb</hi> tree.

<p id=p1043><ab type=parNum>1043</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hunspeedie</hi> <UR>hns pydI</UR>.&mdash;A small shrub, growing close to the ground; its branches thin; its leaves small like the Doodie; it is cool and heavy; useful in disorders of blood, poisons, boils, eruptions, acne, general heat, and possession by evil spirits. It induces costiveness, and is used to counteract the effects of poison of the Tarantula.

<p id=p1044><ab type=parNum>1044</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hingpootrie</hi> <UR>hynk pUtry</UR>.&mdash;It is of two kinds, both pungent and saltish; hot and cardiac; assist digestion; beneficial in pains at the heart, and of the urinary bladder; induces costiveness; remedies piles, disorders of mucus, and <hi>Badgola</hi>.

<pb id=pb177 n=177><p id=p1045><ab type=parNum>1045</ab> <hi rend=sc>Huns</hi> <UR>hns</UR>.&mdash;The flesh is hot and moist; heavy and aphrodisiac; clears the voice and complexion; promotes appetite; beneficial in <hi>Soorkhbad</hi> and disorders of bile. P. <hi>Haaz</hi>.&mdash;&mdash;Goose.

<p id=p1046><ab type=parNum>1046</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hhoobaer</hi> <UR>hUbAyr</UR>.&mdash;A seed about the size and color of the Phalsa, sometimes larger; it is said, that when young, it is red, and when ripe it becomes black. It is a kind of hill Serroe; its leaves like the Jhow. In its taste, it is pungent and bitter, astringent and hot, heavy, and beneficial in disorders of wind, bile, dropsy, and piles; is lithontriptic and vermifuge, and in the quantity of three direms, it expedites the expulsion of the dead f&oelig;tus e utero. It will cure suppression of the menses, but if ate during pregnancy, will produce abortion. A. <hi>Abhul</hi>.

<p id=p1047><ab type=parNum>1047</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heeng</hi> <UR>hyng</UR>.&mdash;Pungent and saltish, also hot; promotes appetite and digestion; beneficial in disorders of wind, mucus, internal itchiness, <hi>Badgola</hi>, flatulence, and pains in the bowels; is vermifuge; increases bile, and is aphrodisiac. It increases the power of all tonics and aphrodisiac prescriptions, but the particulars I have mentioned in my other works.

<p id=p1048><ab type=parNum>1048</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heeraclokhi</hi> <UR>hyrAklUk-hI</UR><corr>.</corr> A. <hi>Dummul Echwder</hi>.

<p id=p1049><ab type=parNum>1049</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heerakussees</hi> <UR>hyrAksys</UR>.&mdash;A kind of <hi>Chund Kussees</hi>.

<p id=p1050><ab type=parNum>1050</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heera</hi> <UR>hyrA</UR>.&mdash;The name for <hi>Almass</hi>.

<p id=p1051><ab type=parNum>1051</ab> <hi rend=sc>Haimowtie</hi> <UR>hymUtI</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Hurrh</hi>.

<p id=p1052><ab type=parNum>1052</ab> <hi rend=sc>Habooka</hi> <UR>hbUkA</UR>.&mdash;A denomination for <hi>Hhoobaer</hi>.

<p id=p1053><ab type=parNum>1053</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hingool</hi> <UR>hngUl</UR>.&mdash;A name for <hi>Shungirf</hi>.



<div1 id=app type=Appendix rend="toc-head(Appendix)">

<div2 type=Section rend="toc-head(Burning in the Hands and Feet)">

<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Sensations of burning in the Hands and Feet.</hi>

<p>This is of two kinds, a dry, and a sweating, kind. The method of cure among the natives is as follows:


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Sweating kind.</hi>

<p>Take of Chook, Khoot, Lahoria Nemuk, each two parts; Black Till Oil, 12 parts; mix and rub in for 14 days.


<p rend="align(center)"><hi>Dry kind.</hi>

<p>Let a hole be dug in the earth, and fire kindled therein, till the ground becomes well heated; strew the bottom of the excavation with Mudar leaves, and sprinkle on them new milk, till the fumes arise. The feet to be placed in the hole, on the leaves, and a blanket <pb id=pb178 n=178>to be spread over, and round the knees, to prevent the escape of the heated vapour. In this manner the patient is to sit till the place becomes cold; and this is to be repeated for seven days, when the cure will be complete.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>In the opinion of the Physicians of Hindostan, the human frame is divided into seven principal parts. These are <hi>chyle</hi>, <hi>blood</hi>, <hi>muscles</hi>, <hi>fat</hi>, <hi>bones</hi>, <hi>brain</hi>, <hi>marrow</hi>, and <hi>semen</hi>.



<milestone unit=tb>

<div2 rend="toc-head(The tastes)">

<p>The tastes are six: viz.

<p><table rend="font-size(small)">
<row><cell rows=3><hi rend=sc>Sweet</hi>,  <cell><hi>Increasing</hi>     <cell>Semen, milk, eye-sight, asthma, obesitas, worms, and affections of the throat.
<row>                               <cell rows=2><hi>Curing</hi>         <cell>Wind and bile.
<row>                                                       <cell>Cool and stomachic; creating appetite.

<row><cell rows=2><hi rend=sc>Acid</hi>,   <cell><hi>Increasing</hi>     <cell>Mucus, bile, emaciation, fermentation of the blood.
<row>                               <cell><hi>Curing</hi>         <cell>Wind.

<row><cell rows=3><hi rend=sc>Salt</hi>,   <cell><hi>Increasing</hi>     <cell>Appetite, digestion, mucus, bile, wind, and disorders of blood.
<row>                               <cell rows=2><hi>Curing</hi>         <cell>or decreasing aphrodisia, and generally relaxant.
<row>                                                       <cell>Light.

<row><cell rows=3><hi rend=sc>Bitter</hi>, <cell><hi>Increasing</hi>     <cell>Bile, wind, dryness, and heat.
<row>                               <cell rows=2><hi>Decreases</hi>      <cell>Milk.
<row>                                                       <cell>Dry and light.

<row><cell rows=3><hi rend=sc>Pungent</hi>,    <cell><hi>Increases</hi>  <cell>Appetite and milk.

<row>                               <cell rows=2><hi>Decreases</hi>      <cell>Thirst and fever.
<row>                                                       <cell>Dry.

<row><cell rows=2><hi rend=sc>Astringent</hi>, <cell><hi>Increases</hi>  <cell>Wind and flatulence.
<row>                               <cell><hi>Decreases</hi>      <cell>Wounds, ulcers, and laxities.
</table>


<milestone unit=tb>

<p>The general prescriptions and favorite formulæ, mentioned throughout the work, are <hi>Tonics</hi>, which preserve health, lengthen life, and strengthen the system.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>The principal secretions or humours are four in number; viz. <hi>mucus</hi> (or phlegm), <hi>bile</hi>, <hi>wind</hi>, and <hi>blood</hi>. When three of these are said to be increased or diminished, it is to be understood, that <hi>blood</hi> is not to be included. In fact, it never is, unless particularly specified.



<pb id=pb179 n=179>
<div2 rend="toc-head(Degrees)">


<p rend="align(center)"><hi rend=sc>Degrees.</hi>

<p>&ldquo;The Yunani physicians, in specifying the different degrees of virtue, or power of their medicines, include in the

<p>&ldquo;<hi>First Degree.</hi>&mdash;All those whose effects are not felt in common doses.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Second Ditto.</hi>&mdash;Such medicines as have perceptible effects; but in a moderate degree.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Third Ditto.</hi>&mdash;Those of greater power, the exhibition of which must be conducted with caution.

<p>&ldquo;<hi>Fourth Ditto.</hi>&mdash;All poisons or medicines of any deleterious properties.&rdquo;



<div2 rend="toc-head(Weights)">

<p rend="align(center)"><hi rend=sc>Weights.</hi>


<p><table>
<row><cell>One <hi>soorkh</hi>&mdash;&mdash; <cell>one grain.
<row><cell>One <hi>masha</hi>&mdash;&mdash; <cell>8 <hi>soorkh</hi>.
<row><cell>One <hi>direm</hi>&mdash;&mdash; <cell>3 <hi>masha</hi>.
<row><cell>10 <hi>mashas</hi>&mdash;&mdash; <cell>one <hi>tolah</hi> or Rupee.
<row><cell cols=2>One <hi>rittal</hi> is about 19 <hi>tolahs</hi> and two <hi>mashas</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2>One <hi>tolah</hi>, 12&frac12; <hi>mashas</hi>.
</table>


<div2 rend="toc-head(Abbreviations)">

<p rend="align(center)"><hi rend=sc>Abbreviations.</hi>

<p>H. <hi>Hindi</hi>, P. <hi>Persian</hi>, A. <hi>Arabic</hi>, S. <hi>Sanscrit</hi>, F. <hi>French</hi>, G. <hi>German</hi><corr>,</corr> I. <hi>Italian</hi>, S. <hi>Spanish</hi>.





<pb id=pb181 n=181>
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 type=Index id=index>
<head>INDEX.</head>

<pb id=pb182 n=182>


<div2 type=letter>
<head>A.</head>

<p>                                         <hi>Art.</hi>

<p>Aak,                                      <ref target=p8>8</ref>

<p>Aal,                                      <ref target=p9>9</ref>

<p>Aaont,                                   <ref target=p83>83</ref>

<p>Abbasie,                                <ref target=p657>657</ref>

<p>Abbea,                                   <ref target=p19>19</ref>

<p>Abi,                                      <ref target=p7>7</ref>

<p>Abnoos,                                  <ref target=p15>15</ref>

<p>Abruc,                                   <ref target=p18>18</ref>

<p>Aderuck,                                 <ref target=p29>29</ref>

<p>Aditt Bagut,                             <ref target=p10>10</ref>

<p>Adjan or Adjain,                         <ref target=p26>26</ref>

<p>Adjmode,                                 <ref target=p22>22</ref>

<p>Adjwain,                                 <ref target=p23>23</ref>

<p>Adjwain, (Khorasanee,)                   <ref target=p24>24</ref>

<p>Adki,                                     <ref target=p4>4</ref>

<p>Aechill,                                 <ref target=p89>89</ref>

<p>Aegoor,                                  <ref target=p88>88</ref>

<p>Aent,                                    <ref target=p90>90</ref>

<p>Aginmunt, <hi>Agwunt</hi>,                        <ref target=p50>50</ref>

<p>Agunie Char,                             <ref target=p55>55</ref>

<p>Agur,                                    <ref target=p54>54</ref>

<p>Agust,                                   <ref target=p51>51</ref>

<p>Ahmlee, also <hi>Buzuroolreshad</hi>,             <ref target=p87>87</ref>

<p>Aistallkund,                             <ref target=p41>41</ref>

<p>Akaholie,                                 <ref target=p3>3</ref>

<p>Akasbele,                                <ref target=p56>56</ref>

<p>Akhroat,                                 <ref target=p52>52</ref>

<p>Akirkirra, or <hi>Akirkirrhà</hi>,                <ref target=p53>53</ref>

<p>Akroat,                                  <ref target=p52>52</ref>

<p>Alaechee,                                <ref target=p59>59</ref>

<p>Aloo, (Bochara,)                         <ref target=p14>14</ref>

<p>Alsi,                                    <ref target=p57>57</ref>

<p>Alta,                                    <ref target=p60>60</ref>

<p>Am, Ambe, Anbe,                           <ref target=p1>1</ref>

<p>Amarbele,                                <ref target=p66>66</ref>

<p>Ambarae,                                 <ref target=p65>65</ref>

<p>Ambaray, or <hi>Ambara</hi>,                      <ref target=p78>78</ref>

<p>Ambegool, or <hi>Angool</hi>, or <hi>Ambegooda</hi>,       <ref target=p73>73</ref>

<p>Ambeloona,                               <ref target=p72>72</ref>

<p>Amlie,                                   <ref target=p63>63</ref>

<p>Amratuck,                                <ref target=p68>68</ref>

<p>Amroude,                                 <ref target=p67>67</ref>

<p>Amrutphull,                              <ref target=p64>64</ref>

<p>Amulbedh,                                <ref target=p61>61</ref>

<p>Amulchangerie,                           <ref target=p62>62</ref>

<p>Amultas, also <hi>Kurwara</hi>,                   <ref target=p69>69</ref>

<p>Ananass, also <hi>Kutel Suffrie</hi>,             <ref target=p70>70</ref>

<p>Anar,                                    <ref target=p76>76</ref>

<p>Anbertasung,                             <ref target=p80>80</ref>

<p>Anbihildee,                              <ref target=p16>16</ref>

<p>Andaluck,                                <ref target=p28>28</ref>

<p>Anderjow,                                <ref target=p75>75</ref>

<p>Angud,                                   <ref target=p81>81</ref>

<pb id=pb183 n=183>

<p>Anjeer,                                  <ref target=p82>82</ref>

<p>Ankaloon,                                <ref target=p79>79</ref>

<p>Anula, or <hi>Amle</hi>,                           <ref target=p5>5</ref>

<p>Anwul,                                   <ref target=p12>12</ref>

<p>Aoloo,                                   <ref target=p58>58</ref>

<p>Aoode Belao,                             <ref target=p84>84</ref>

<p>Aoonk,                                   <ref target=p86>86</ref>

<p>Aoont Kutara,                            <ref target=p85>85</ref>

<p>Aord, or <hi>Aort</hi>, or <hi>Maash</hi>,                 <ref target=p32>32</ref>

<p>Aorde Gunta,                             <ref target=p40>40</ref>

<p>Aoshire, <hi>Kuss Kuss</hi>, <hi>Ooseer</hi>?              <ref target=p47>47</ref>

<p>Aotungun,                                <ref target=p20>20</ref>

<p>Apheem,                                  <ref target=p49>49</ref>

<p>Apurjeeta,                               <ref target=p17>17</ref>

<p>Aramsheetul,                              <ref target=p2>2</ref>

<p>Area,                                    <ref target=p11>11</ref>

<p>Arhir, or <hi>Toor</hi>,                          <ref target=p31>31</ref>

<p>Arjun,                                   <ref target=p36>36</ref>

<p>Arloo, <hi>Catoombura</hi>, or <hi>Sheunag</hi>,           <ref target=p37>37</ref>

<p>Armeede,                                 <ref target=p39>39</ref>

<p>Arnd,                                    <ref target=p34>34</ref>

<p>Arné,                                    <ref target=p33>33</ref>

<p>Arnee,                                   <ref target=p30>30</ref>

<p>Aru,                                      <ref target=p6>6</ref>

<p>Aruk,                                    <ref target=p13>13</ref>

<p>Arusa,                                   <ref target=p35>35</ref>

<p>Arvie, or <hi>Arum Colocasia</hi>,                <ref target=p38>38</ref>

<p>Asgund,                                  <ref target=p43>43</ref>

<p>Asperuk,                                 <ref target=p42>42</ref>

<p>Asphill, <hi>Padmunie</hi>,                       <ref target=p44>44</ref>

<p>Aspurka,                                 <ref target=p46>46</ref>

<p>Asteghoon,                               <ref target=p48>48</ref>

<p>Astull, <hi>Buntàki</hi>,                         <ref target=p45>45</ref>

<p>Atees,                                   <ref target=p21>21</ref>

<p>Aunalie,                                 <ref target=p77>77</ref>


<div2>
<head>B.</head>

<p>Baag,                                   <ref target=p108>108</ref>

<p>Babchee, or <hi>Bakchee</hi>,                    <ref target=p102>102</ref>

<p>Babool,                                 <ref target=p126>126</ref>

<p>Baboona, or <hi>Marehtee</hi>,                   <ref target=p113>113</ref>

<p>Babur,                                  <ref target=p104>104</ref>

<p>Badgan, Khutay                          <ref target=p115>115</ref>

<p>Badjera,                                <ref target=p122>122</ref>

<p>Baeberung,                              <ref target=p121>121</ref>

<p>Baele, also <hi>Byll</hi>,                       <ref target=p271>271</ref>

<p>Bagerie,                                <ref target=p185>185</ref>

<p>Baluka,                                  <ref target=p95>95</ref>

<p>Balchur,                                <ref target=p120>120</ref>

<p>Bale,                                   <ref target=p270>270</ref>

<p>Bander,                                 <ref target=p107>107</ref>

<p>Banjkakóra,                              <ref target=p98>98</ref>

<p>Bans,                                   <ref target=p114>114</ref>

<p>Bansa, also Piábansa                     <ref target=p94>94</ref>

<pb id=pb184 n=184>

<p>Barasinga,                            <ref target=p105>105</ref>

<p>Baraykund, or <hi>Keetkuroódh</hi>, or <hi>Subbuskund</hi>,            <ref target=p97>97</ref>

<p>Barehie,                              <ref target=p117>117</ref>

<p>Baremoo,                              <ref target=p116>116</ref>

<p>Barumbie or Soonputtie,               <ref target=p163>163</ref>

<p>Batassa,                              <ref target=p134>134</ref>

<p>Batees,                               <ref target=p138>138</ref>

<p>Bealduntuck,                          <ref target=p279>279</ref>

<p>Bear, also <hi>Konar</hi>,                     <ref target=p276>276</ref>

<p>Beekhbans, or <hi>Beedjbans</hi>,               <ref target=p93>93</ref>

<p>Beerbahootie,                         <ref target=p281>281</ref>

<p>Becktindeek,                          <ref target=p189>189</ref>

<p>Bedareekund,                          <ref target=p149>149</ref>

<p>Bedarkee,                             <ref target=p150>150</ref>

<p>Bedhara,                              <ref target=p152>152</ref>

<p>Beechnak,                             <ref target=p148>148</ref>

<p>Beedjbund,                            <ref target=p266>266</ref>

<p>Bejoura,                              <ref target=p145>145</ref>

<p>Belaikund,                            <ref target=p191>191</ref>

<p>Benowla,                              <ref target=p212>212</ref>

<p>Benth,                                <ref target=p267>267</ref>

<p>Berahumie,                            <ref target=p175>175</ref>

<p>Berahumnie, or <hi>Berrumdundie</hi>,          <ref target=p174>174</ref>

<p>Berchakund,                           <ref target=p162>162</ref>

<p>Berehta, or Berehti,                  <ref target=p166>166</ref>

<p>Beridda,                              <ref target=p160>160</ref>

<p>Bhaer, also <hi>Mendha</hi>,                   <ref target=p237>237</ref>

<p>Bhains, also <hi>Mahaki</hi>,                  <ref target=p238>238</ref>

<p>Bhang, also <hi>Bidjia</hi>,                   <ref target=p248>248</ref>

<p>Bhangra,                              <ref target=p230>230</ref>

<p>Bhapungi,                             <ref target=p254>254</ref>

<p>Bharingee,                            <ref target=p236>236</ref>

<p>Bhateele,                             <ref target=p257>257</ref>

<p>Bhehi,                                <ref target=p244>244</ref>

<p>Bhelawj,                              <ref target=p242>242</ref>

<p>Bhendi,                               <ref target=p250>250</ref>

<p>Bheria, also <hi>Bhudda</hi>,                  <ref target=p239>239</ref>

<p>Bheroza, also Gundha Bheroza,         <ref target=p256>256</ref>

<p>Bhindalæ,                             <ref target=p252>252</ref>

<p>Bhoeperus,                            <ref target=p247>247</ref>

<p>Bhohphilly,                           <ref target=p262>262</ref>

<p>Bhoje Puttur, also <hi>Burje Puttur</hi>       <ref target=p232>232</ref>

<p>Bhoodill,                             <ref target=p258>258</ref>

<p>Bhoom Kajoor,                         <ref target=p243>243</ref>

<p>Bhoom Kudum,                          <ref target=p249>249</ref>

<p>Bhoothpees,                           <ref target=p259>259</ref>

<p>Bhoom Amulek,                         <ref target=p233>233</ref>

<p>Bhuhira,                              <ref target=p241>241</ref>

<p>Bhuiteroor,                           <ref target=p246>246</ref>

<p>Bhuntaki,                             <ref target=p264>264</ref>

<p>Bhu&apos;th Kutaeye,                       <ref target=p261>261</ref>

<p>Billie,                               <ref target=p194>194</ref>

<p>Billoousseeke,                        <ref target=p195>195</ref>

<p>Bindaal,                              <ref target=p216>216</ref>

<p>Bindeokurkotheki,                     <ref target=p217>217</ref>

<p>Birnaoo, or Buroo,                    <ref target=p158>158</ref>

<p>Biscopra,                             <ref target=p177>177</ref>

<p>Bishash,                              <ref target=p182>182</ref>

<p>Bishnookrantha,                       <ref target=p181>181</ref>

<p>Bitchoo,                              <ref target=p144>144</ref>

<p>Bole,                                 <ref target=p227>227</ref>

<p>Boochitter, or <hi>Beechittúr</hi>,            <ref target=p245>245</ref>

<pb id=pb185 n=185>

<p>Boont,                                  <ref target=p223>223</ref>

<p>Bokun, or <hi>Bookla</hi> or <hi>Book</hi>,               <ref target=p183>183</ref>

<p>Buckree,                                <ref target=p188>188</ref>

<p>Budgerkund, also <hi>Soorum</hi>,                <ref target=p147>147</ref>

<p>Budhill,                                <ref target=p151>151</ref>

<p>Budjaesaar,                             <ref target=p143>143</ref>

<p>Bukaen,                                 <ref target=p186>186</ref>

<p>Bukochie,                               <ref target=p184>184</ref>

<p>Bulka,                                  <ref target=p198>198</ref>

<p>Bunbele,                                <ref target=p203>203</ref>

<p>Bunda,                                  <ref target=p199>199</ref>

<p>Bunpowarie,                             <ref target=p207>207</ref>

<p>Bunslochun,                             <ref target=p210>210</ref>

<p>Burberi,                                <ref target=p164>164</ref>

<p>Bureeja,                                <ref target=p165>165</ref>

<p>Burrh,                                  <ref target=p157>157</ref>

<p>Burruntaaki,                            <ref target=p171>171</ref>

<p>Buryara,                                <ref target=p170>170</ref>

<p>Bussunti,                               <ref target=p180>180</ref>

<p>Butaer,                                 <ref target=p137>137</ref>

<p>Butch,                                  <ref target=p146>146</ref>

<p>Butchudder,                             <ref target=p142>142</ref>

<p>Butela,                                 <ref target=p136>136</ref>

<p>Buthua, or <hi>Pasthuk</hi>,                     <ref target=p135>135</ref>

<p>Byll,                                   <ref target=p196>196</ref>

<p>Bylla,                                  <ref target=p197>197</ref>

<p>Byrumbseerjella,                        <ref target=p168>168</ref>


<div2>
<head>C.</head>

<p>Catoombura,                              <ref target=p37>37</ref>

<p>Chaab,                                  <ref target=p340>340</ref>

<p>Chachoondur, also <hi>Chulde</hi>,               <ref target=p357>357</ref>

<p>Chakoth,                                <ref target=p347>347</ref>

<p>Chakussoo,                              <ref target=p342>342</ref>

<p>Chalkurie,                              <ref target=p348>348</ref>

<p>Champa, or <hi>Chumpuk</hi>,                     <ref target=p385>385</ref>

<p>Changerie,                              <ref target=p349>349</ref>

<p>Charai, or <hi>Charwolie</hi>,                   <ref target=p344>344</ref>

<p>Cheea, or <hi>Cheetkeh</hi>,                     <ref target=p433>433</ref>

<p>Cheebook,                               <ref target=p350>350</ref>

<p>Cheedah,                                <ref target=p426>426</ref>

<p>Cheehuræ,                               <ref target=p421>421</ref>

<p>Cheel,                                  <ref target=p430>430</ref>

<p>Cheenah,                                <ref target=p427>427</ref>

<p>Cheenuk,                                <ref target=p423>423</ref>

<p>Cherie,                                 <ref target=p408>408</ref>

<p>Cherkund,                               <ref target=p416>416</ref>

<p>Cheetah,                           <ref target=p429>429</ref>, <ref target=p432>432</ref>

<p>Cheetul,                                <ref target=p428>428</ref>

<p>Chehtaon,                               <ref target=p404>404</ref>

<p>Chellwuk,                               <ref target=p376>376</ref>

<p>Cherakakoli, or <hi>Chershookla</hi>, also <hi>Chermudera</hi>,                 <ref target=p406>406</ref>

<p>Cherayta, also <hi>Punsaal</hi>,                 <ref target=p362>362</ref>

<p>Chereela,                               <ref target=p414>414</ref>

<p>Chermbærie,                             <ref target=p386>386</ref>

<p>Chesteymud, <hi>Chestee</hi>, also <hi>Chitemud</hi>,     <ref target=p364>364</ref>

<p>Chetuck,                                <ref target=p352>352</ref>

<p>Cheylchish,                             <ref target=p377>377</ref>

<p>Chichinda, also <hi>Chunchilund</hi>,            <ref target=p356>356</ref>

<p>Chikara,                                <ref target=p366>366</ref>

<p>Chillie,                                <ref target=p378>378</ref>

<p>Chirchirra,                             <ref target=p358>358</ref>

<pb id=pb186 n=186>

<p>China, also <hi>Chituck</hi>,                   <ref target=p360>360</ref>

<p>Chirownjee,                            <ref target=p361>361</ref>

<p>Chirpoota,                             <ref target=p359>359</ref>

<p>Chirr,                                 <ref target=p413>413</ref>

<p>Chitchera, or <hi>Chichira</hi>, also <hi>Chirchira</hi><corr>,</corr>      <ref target=p351>351</ref>

<p>Ch&oelig;kurk,                            <ref target=p370>370</ref>

<p>Chohara,                               <ref target=p412>412</ref>

<p>Choke,                                 <ref target=p396>396</ref>

<p>Choocheroo,                            <ref target=p418>418</ref>

<p>Choonderdhan, or <hi>Jowdhan</hi>, also <hi>Rukitsaal</hi>,                           <ref target=p407>407</ref>

<p>Chouch,                                <ref target=p403>403</ref>

<p>Chowlai, or <hi>Chowrai</hi>,                   <ref target=p397>397</ref>

<p>Chukadana,                             <ref target=p374>374</ref>

<p>Chukeerka,                             <ref target=p369>369</ref>

<p>Chukond,                               <ref target=p371>371</ref>

<p>Chukora,                               <ref target=p367>367</ref>

<p>Chukotrah,                             <ref target=p372>372</ref>

<p>Chukua Chukui,                         <ref target=p368>368</ref>

<p>Chukunder,                             <ref target=p365>365</ref>

<p>Chumbeley,                             <ref target=p384>384</ref>

<p>Chumbuck,                              <ref target=p389>389</ref>

<p>Chumgader,                             <ref target=p382>382</ref>

<p>Chunderkanth,                          <ref target=p390>390</ref>

<p>Chundun,                               <ref target=p392>392</ref>

<p>Chundunsarba,                          <ref target=p393>393</ref>

<p>Chundurseha,                           <ref target=p417>417</ref>

<p>Chundsoor,                             <ref target=p391>391</ref>

<p>Chuttra,                               <ref target=p354>354</ref>

<p>Chuttar Phill,                         <ref target=p355>355</ref>

<p>Coochilla,                             <ref target=p712>712</ref>


<div2>
<head>D.</head>

<p>Daad Murden,                           <ref target=p446>446</ref>

<p>Dabeh,                                 <ref target=p441>441</ref>

<p>Dakh,                                  <ref target=p445>445</ref>

<p>Daoodie,                               <ref target=p440>440</ref>

<p>Darhuld                                <ref target=p438>438</ref>

<p>Darma, also <hi>Soombulkhar</hi>,               <ref target=p444>444</ref>

<p>Darmee Saar,                           <ref target=p443>443</ref>

<p>Darum,                                 <ref target=p442>442</ref>

<p>Datoon, also <hi>Danth</hi>, or <hi>Danti</hi>,          <ref target=p439>439</ref>

<p>Deodar, also <hi>Déodarie</hi>,                 <ref target=p475>475</ref>

<p>Deomun,                                <ref target=p476>476</ref>

<p>Dhadahwun,                             <ref target=p462>462</ref>

<p>Dhaie,                                 <ref target=p470>470</ref>

<p>Dhak,                                  <ref target=p467>467</ref>

<p>Dhamin, or <hi>Dhunoon</hi>,                    <ref target=p460>460</ref>

<p>Dhanqie, or <hi>Dhaoie</hi>                     <ref target=p471>471</ref>

<p>Dhatura,                               <ref target=p465>465</ref>

<p>Dhaw,                                  <ref target=p463>463</ref>

<p>Dhawa,                                 <ref target=p464>464</ref>

<p>Dhawnie,                               <ref target=p472>472</ref>

<p>Dheerukmola,                           <ref target=p473>473</ref>

<p>Dhendus,                               <ref target=p474>474</ref>

<p>Dholkudum,                             <ref target=p468>468</ref>

<p>Dhumaha,                               <ref target=p469>469</ref>

<p>Dhunia,                                <ref target=p466>466</ref>

<p>Dhunjawasa,                            <ref target=p461>461</ref>

<p>Doob, also <hi>Shittbára</hi>,                  <ref target=p455>455</ref>

<p>Doodee,                                <ref target=p457>457</ref>

<p>Doodhee, also <hi>Dukdòka</hi>,           <ref target=p456>456</ref>

<p>Doodka,                                <ref target=p459>459</ref>

<p>Doódputeya,                            <ref target=p458>458</ref>

<p>Dooparia,                              <ref target=p447>447</ref>

<pb id=pb187 n=187>

<p>Dukdoka,                <ref target=p452>452</ref>

<p>Dumna, also <hi>Dawna</hi>,       <ref target=p453>453</ref>

<p>Dundundana,             <ref target=p454>454</ref>

<p>Durba,                  <ref target=p449>449</ref>

<p>Durbhur,                <ref target=p450>450</ref>

<p>Dusmool,                <ref target=p451>451</ref>

<p>Dutchina Virna,         <ref target=p448>448</ref>


<div2>
<head>G.</head>

<p>Gajur,                  <ref target=p676>676</ref>

<p>Geerehti,               <ref target=p816>816</ref>

<p>Geerguth,               <ref target=p726>726</ref>

<p>Gehoon,                 <ref target=p850>850</ref>

<p>Geroo,                  <ref target=p851>851</ref>

<p>Ghafis,                 <ref target=p660>660</ref>

<p>Ghar,                   <ref target=p661>661</ref>

<p>Ghareekoon,             <ref target=p663>663</ref>

<p>Ghasool,                <ref target=p662>662</ref>

<p>Ghekwaar, or <hi>Ghwar</hi>,        <ref target=p827>827</ref>

<p>Gheyd,                  <ref target=p835>835</ref>

<p>Ghirb,                  <ref target=p664>664</ref>

<p>Ghoghaie,               <ref target=p658>658</ref>

<p>Ghora,                  <ref target=p820>820</ref>

<p>Gillo,                  <ref target=p754>754</ref>

<p>Godoon,                 <ref target=p793>793</ref>

<p>Goh,                    <ref target=p801>801</ref>

<p>Gokhroo, also <hi>Kunthphill</hi>,       <ref target=p803>803</ref>

<p>Gomenduk,               <ref target=p788>788</ref>

<p>Goobrowla, also <hi>Goobreyla</hi>,       <ref target=p694>694</ref>

<p>Goodhul,                <ref target=p718>718</ref>

<p>Googeerun, or <hi>Gugeeroo</hi>,       <ref target=p752>752</ref>

<p>Googul,                 <ref target=p809>809</ref>

<p>Gooha,                  <ref target=p811>811</ref>

<p>Goolkhairoo,            <ref target=p756>756</ref>

<p>Goolur,                 <ref target=p812>812</ref>

<p>Gooma,                  <ref target=p789>789</ref>

<p>Goondinie,              <ref target=p810>810</ref>

<p>Goond,                  <ref target=p768>768</ref>

<p>Goondroo, or <hi>Goonderuk</hi>,      <ref target=p808>808</ref>

<p>Goondur,                  <ref target=p776>776</ref>

<p>Goonma,                   <ref target=p813>813</ref>

<p>Goongchee,                <ref target=p828>828</ref>

<p>Goor,                     <ref target=p731>731</ref>

<p>Goorcha,                  <ref target=p786>786</ref>

<p>Gooroochna, or <hi>Gooroochun</hi>,       <ref target=p785>785</ref>

<p>Gota,                     <ref target=p805>805</ref>

<p>Gowrbaghan,               <ref target=p792>792</ref>

<p>Gowrdun, also <hi>Sutpootrie</hi>,      <ref target=p787>787</ref>

<p>Gowreh,                   <ref target=p659>659</ref>

<p>Gowrohun,                 <ref target=p671>671</ref>

<p>Gowruk,                   <ref target=p794>794</ref>

<p>Goww,                     <ref target=p790>790</ref>

<p>Gowdunta,                 <ref target=p804>804</ref>

<p>Gudjpepullie, also <hi>Gudjpeepul</hi>,      <ref target=p710>710</ref>

<p>Gudha,                    <ref target=p716>716</ref>

<p>Gudloon,                  <ref target=p717>717</ref>

<p>Gugundool,                <ref target=p751>751</ref>

<p>Gulbar,                   <ref target=p755>755</ref>

<p>Gumbhar,                  <ref target=p764>764</ref>

<p>Gundheel,                 <ref target=p775>775</ref>

<p>Gundhka,                  <ref target=p783>783</ref>

<p>Gundhur,                  <ref target=p782>782</ref>

<p>Gunduk,                   <ref target=p780>780</ref>

<p>Gunyar,                   <ref target=p769>769</ref>

<p>Gurehri,                  <ref target=p723>723</ref>

<p>Gyndha,                   <ref target=p837>837</ref>



<pb id=pb188 n=188>
<div2>
<head>H.</head>

<p>Habooka, <ref target=p1052>1052</ref>

<p>Haimowtie, <ref target=p1051>1051</ref>

<p>Haloon, <ref target=p1025>1025</ref>

<p>Harsinghar, also <hi>Hursinghar</hi>, <ref target=p1024>1024</ref>

<p>Harun, <ref target=p1031>1031</ref>

<p>Heeng, <ref target=p1047>1047</ref>

<p>Heera, <ref target=p1050>1050</ref>

<p>Heeraclokhi, <ref target=p1048>1048</ref>

<p>Heerakussees, <ref target=p1049>1049</ref>

<p>Hhoobaer, <ref target=p1046>1046</ref>

<p>Hingool, <ref target=p1053>1053</ref>

<p>Hingote, <ref target=p1042>1042</ref>

<p>Hingpootrie, <ref target=p1044>1044</ref>

<p>Hoolhool, <ref target=p1040>1040</ref>

<p>Hoorhoora, <ref target=p1027>1027</ref>

<p>Hudbjora, <ref target=p1026>1026</ref>

<p>Huldee, also <hi>Huld</hi>, <ref target=p1038>1038</ref>

<p>Huldia, <ref target=p1039>1039</ref>

<p>Huldoo, <ref target=p1041>1041</ref>

<p>Huns, <ref target=p1045>1045</ref>

<p>Hunspeedie, <ref target=p1043>1043</ref>

<p>Hurbarbeorhi, <ref target=p1033>1033</ref>

<p>Hurr, <ref target=p1032>1032</ref>

<p>Hurtaal, <ref target=p1029>1029</ref>

<p>Hurunkherie, or <hi>Hurunkhoorie</hi>, <ref target=p1028>1028</ref>

<p>Husthal, <ref target=p1035>1035</ref>

<p>Husthchinkhar, <ref target=p1037>1037</ref>

<p>Husthkool, <ref target=p1034>1034</ref>

<p>Husthuk, <ref target=p1036>1036</ref>

<p>Hyrbee, <ref target=p1030>1030</ref>


<div2>
<head>I.</head>

<p>Inderain, <ref target=p74>74</ref>


<div2>
<head><corr>J.</corr></head>

<p>Jaal, <ref target=p345>345</ref>

<p>Jaie Puttrie, <ref target=p341>341</ref>

<p>Jaiey, <ref target=p346>346</ref>

<p>Jaiphill, <ref target=p343>343</ref>

<p>Jamalgotay, <ref target=p383>383</ref>

<p>Jamin, <ref target=p338>338</ref>

<p>Jatie, <ref target=p339>339</ref>

<p>Jawakhar, <ref target=p402>402</ref>

<p>Jawansa, <ref target=p395>395</ref>

<p>Jeengha, <ref target=p409>409</ref>

<p>Jeepaul, <ref target=p431>431</ref>

<p>Jeewuk, <ref target=p422>422</ref>

<p>Jeewung, also <hi>Buthua</hi>, <ref target=p425>425</ref>

<p>Jeewuntie, or <hi>Jeéwúnie</hi>, or <hi>Jéwá</hi>, <ref target=p424>424</ref>

<p>Jest, <ref target=p363>363</ref>

<p>Jhirberie, <ref target=p419>419</ref>

<p>Jholputtur, <ref target=p405>405</ref>

<p>Jhow, <ref target=p415>415</ref>

<p>Jill Benth, <ref target=p379>379</ref>

<p>Jill Butees, <ref target=p380>380</ref>

<p>Jill Neeb, <ref target=p381>381</ref>

<p>Jillpeelbuka, <ref target=p375>375</ref>

<p>Jojakhar, <ref target=p411>411</ref>

<p>Joonk, <ref target=p400>400</ref>

<p>Jooqunoo, <ref target=p373>373</ref>

<p>Juhan, <ref target=p401>401</ref>

<p>Juhi, <ref target=p398>398</ref>

<p>Jungliechuha, <ref target=p388>388</ref>

<p>Junkar, <ref target=p410>410</ref>

<p>Junth, <ref target=p394>394</ref>

<p>Junthmook, <ref target=p387>387</ref>

<pb id=pb189 n=189>

<p>Jutamaasie, <ref target=p353>353</ref>

<p>Juwar, <ref target=p399>399</ref>

<p>Jyaphupp, <ref target=p420>420</ref>


<div2>
<head>K.</head>

<p>Kagphill, or <hi>Kagtoondie</hi>, <ref target=p675>675</ref>

<p>Kaiphill, or <hi>Kutphill</hi>, <ref target=p677>677</ref>

<p>Kakjunga, <ref target=p665>665</ref>

<p>Kakolie, <ref target=p667>667</ref>

<p>Kakra Singie, <ref target=p673>673</ref>

<p>Kaksaag, <ref target=p668>668</ref>

<p>Kalakora, <ref target=p685>685</ref>

<p>Kalesur, or <hi>Kulesur</hi>, <ref target=p688>688</ref>

<p>Kalizeerie, <ref target=p679>679</ref>

<p>Kalseenbie, <ref target=p682>682</ref>

<p>Kanakutchoo, <ref target=p674>674</ref>

<p>Kanch or <hi>Kaatch</hi>, <ref target=p678>678</ref>

<p>Kandagolhi, <ref target=p690>690</ref>

<p>Kangeerug, <ref target=p681>681</ref>

<p>Kanghi, <ref target=p689>689</ref>

<p>Kanjee, <ref target=p670>670</ref>

<p>Kans, <ref target=p666>666</ref>

<p>Kansi, <ref target=p682>682</ref>

<p>Kapithar Jug, <ref target=p696>696</ref>

<p>Kapoor, <ref target=p691>691</ref>

<p>Kapoorbile, <ref target=p693>693</ref>

<p>Kapoor Kutcherie, <ref target=p698>698</ref>

<p>Kapoorie, <ref target=p699>699</ref>

<p>Karela, <ref target=p733>733</ref>

<p>Kareyl, <ref target=p721>721</ref>

<p>Karunj, <ref target=p722>722</ref>

<p>Karownda, <ref target=p720>720</ref>

<p>Kasht, <ref target=p680>680</ref>

<p>Kasmerie, or <hi>Kasmuroo</hi>, or <hi>Kasmurga</hi>, or <hi>Kasheera</hi>, <ref target=p669>669</ref>

<p>Kastipadile, <ref target=p687>687</ref>

<p>Katchloon, <ref target=p686>686</ref>

<p>Kath, also <hi>Kuth</hi>, <ref target=p672>672</ref>

<p>Kathmanda, <ref target=p684>684</ref>

<p>Kawaal, <ref target=p798>798</ref>

<p>Kawul, <ref target=p765>765</ref>

<p>Kawulguth, <ref target=p766>766</ref>

<p>Keekur, or <hi>Babool</hi>, <ref target=p848>848</ref>

<p>Keera, or <hi>Kheera</hi>, <ref target=p824>824</ref>

<p>Keet, or <hi>Keetie</hi>, <ref target=p849>849</ref>

<p>Keetkarode, <ref target=p847>847</ref>

<p>Kela, <ref target=p846>846</ref>

<p>Keloondha, <ref target=p760>760</ref>

<p>Kenkra, <ref target=p838>838</ref>

<p>Keora, <ref target=p843>843</ref>

<p>Kesur, or <hi>Kunkum</hi>, <ref target=p839>839</ref>

<p>Kethki, <ref target=p844>844</ref>

<p>Kewanch, <ref target=p845>845</ref>

<p>Khaer, also <hi>Cudder</hi>, <ref target=p815>815</ref>

<p>Khand, <ref target=p825>825</ref>

<p>Khaperia, <ref target=p823>823</ref>

<p>Khelowrie, <ref target=p829>829</ref>

<p>Kherboozah, <ref target=p436>436</ref>

<p>Khergosh, <ref target=p435>435</ref>

<p>Kherie, <ref target=p817>817</ref>

<p>Khesoo, <ref target=p833>833</ref>

<p>Khewumberie, <ref target=p832>832</ref>

<p>Khopra, <ref target=p831>831</ref>

<p>Khorasanee (Adjwain), <ref target=p25>25</ref>

<p>Khull, <ref target=p830>830</ref>

<pb id=pb190 n=190>

<p>Khusa, also <hi>Osheére</hi>, <ref target=p437>437</ref>

<p>Khutchur, <ref target=p434>434</ref>

<p>Khutmnl, <ref target=p821>821</ref>

<p>Khylakhylie, <ref target=p826>826</ref>

<p>Khynth, <ref target=p834>834</ref>

<p>Kinchua, <ref target=p836>836</ref>

<p>Kobhee, <ref target=p791>791</ref>

<p>Kokla, <ref target=p800>800</ref>

<p>Kookra, <ref target=p748>748</ref>

<p>Kookrie, <ref target=p749>749</ref>

<p>Kooktunduk, <ref target=p819>819</ref>

<p>Kookurbangra, <ref target=p807>807</ref>

<p>Kookurchundie, <ref target=p806>806</ref>

<p>Kooleejan, <ref target=p758>758</ref>

<p>Koolunta, <ref target=p759>759</ref>

<p>Koonch, <ref target=p796>796</ref>

<p>Koonda, also <hi>Pita</hi>, <ref target=p814>814</ref>

<p>Koondoorie, <ref target=p773>773</ref>

<p>Koonj, <ref target=p795>795</ref>

<p>Koonja, <ref target=p778>778</ref>

<p>Koontukphill, also <hi>Kuntukanta</hi>, <ref target=p771>771</ref>

<p>Kootki, <ref target=p701>701</ref>

<p>Kora, <ref target=p735>735</ref>

<p>Korund, <ref target=p730>730</ref>

<p>Kowa, also <hi>Koral</hi>, <ref target=p799>799</ref>

<p>Kowadoorie, <ref target=p802>802</ref>

<p>Kowla, <ref target=p767>767</ref>

<p>Kowrie, <ref target=p797>797</ref>

<p>Krishndaan, <ref target=p724>724</ref>

<p>Krishn Moolie, <ref target=p738>738</ref>

<p>Krishn Saarba, <ref target=p739>739</ref>

<p>Kubab Cheenee, <ref target=p697>697</ref>

<p>Kudum, <ref target=p715>715</ref>

<p>Kujoor, <ref target=p822>822</ref>

<p>Kukora, <ref target=p747>747</ref>

<p>Kukrie, <ref target=p750>750</ref>

<p>Kukrownda, <ref target=p753>753</ref>

<p>Kukrownela, <ref target=p746>746</ref>

<p>Kulownjee, <ref target=p761>761</ref>

<p>Kulumbuk, <ref target=p757>757</ref>

<p>Kumbeela, <ref target=p779>779</ref>

<p>Kumode, or <hi>Komoodutti</hi>, <ref target=p762>762</ref>

<p>Kumruk, or <hi>Kumruka</hi>, <ref target=p763>763</ref>

<p>Kunaer or <hi>Kurneer</hi>, <ref target=p777>777</ref>

<p>Kundurdolie, <ref target=p772>772</ref>

<p>Kunghi, <ref target=p784>784</ref>

<p>Kungni, <ref target=p774>774</ref>

<p>Kunkole, <ref target=p770>770</ref>

<p>Kunoocha, <ref target=p781>781</ref>

<p>Kupass, or <hi>Kurpass</hi>, <ref target=p696>696</ref>

<p>Kupoor, also <hi>Khesia</hi>, <ref target=p692>692</ref>

<p>Kurinjua, or <hi>Korinjeka</hi>, or <hi>Kurinjee</hi>, <ref target=p728>728</ref>

<p>Kurkund, <ref target=p734>734</ref>

<p>Kurkura, <ref target=p727>727</ref>

<p>Kurna, <ref target=p719>719</ref>

<p>Kurni, <ref target=p736>736</ref>

<p>Kurr, <ref target=p732>732</ref>

<p>Kurrukphill, <ref target=p737>737</ref>

<p>Kurwanuk, <ref target=p725>725</ref>

<p>Kurwara, or <hi>Kurwala</hi>, <ref target=p729>729</ref>

<p>Kussees, <ref target=p745>745</ref>

<p>Kusseroo, or <hi>Kusseruk</hi>, <ref target=p741>741</ref>

<p>Kussoombh, <ref target=p743>743</ref>

<pb id=pb191 n=191>

<p>Kussowndie, or <hi>Kussownda</hi>, <ref target=p740>740</ref>

<p>Kustoorie, <ref target=p744>744</ref>

<p>Kustooryea Mirg, <ref target=p742>742</ref>

<p>Kutai, <ref target=p704>704</ref>

<p>Kutara, <ref target=p702>702</ref>

<p>Kutchaloo, <ref target=p709>709</ref>

<p>Kutcherie, <ref target=p713>713</ref>

<p>Kutchnar, <ref target=p708>708</ref>

<p>Kutchoor, <ref target=p714>714</ref>

<p>Kutchua, <ref target=p711>711</ref>

<p>Kuteera, <ref target=p703>703</ref>

<p>Kuth, <ref target=p707>707</ref>

<p>Kuthael, <ref target=p700>700</ref>

<p>Kutoonbur, <ref target=p705>705</ref>

<p>Kutputrie, <ref target=p706>706</ref>

<p>Kyloot, <ref target=p842>842</ref>

<p>Kyrnie, <ref target=p818>818</ref>

<p>Kyte, <ref target=p840>840</ref>

<p>Kytiputtrie, <ref target=p841>841</ref>


<div2>
<head>L.</head>

<p>Laak, <ref target=p852>852</ref>

<p>Lahi, <ref target=p853>853</ref>

<p>Lahsun, <ref target=p875>875</ref>

<p>Lahusoonia, <ref target=p877>877</ref>

<p>Langullie, <ref target=p854>854</ref>

<p>Lasora, <ref target=p876>876</ref>

<p>Lawa, <ref target=p855>855</ref>

<p>Lichkutch, also <hi>Lukitch</hi>, <ref target=p861>861</ref>

<p>Lichmiphill, <ref target=p860>860</ref>

<p>Lichmuna, <ref target=p859>859</ref>

<p>Lobaan, <ref target=p869>869</ref>

<p>Lobeia, <ref target=p874>874</ref>

<p>Lodh, <ref target=p864>864</ref>

<p>Loha, <ref target=p867>867</ref>

<p>Lolie, <ref target=p871>871</ref>

<p>Lomrie, <ref target=p872>872</ref>

<p>Long, <ref target=p868>868</ref>

<p>Longmushk, <ref target=p873>873</ref>

<p>Loni, <ref target=p870>870</ref>

<p>Loodh&apos;phup, <ref target=p863>863</ref>

<p>Loonia, <ref target=p866>866</ref>

<p>Lubhera, <ref target=p855>855</ref>

<p>Lublie, or <hi>Lolie</hi>, <ref target=p856>856</ref>

<p>Lukmunia, and <hi>Lukmunie</hi>, <ref target=p862>862</ref>

<p>Lutoobrie, also <hi>Soonitjhal</hi>, <ref target=p857>857</ref>

<p>Lydoaloo, <ref target=p858>858</ref>


<div2>
<head>M.</head>

<p>Maachik, <ref target=p884>884</ref>

<p>Maad, <ref target=p882>882</ref>

<p>Maak, also <hi>Maash</hi>, <ref target=p881>881</ref>

<p>Maankund, <ref target=p886>886</ref>

<p>Maashpurnie, also <hi>Makonie</hi>, <ref target=p890>890</ref>

<p>Maat, <ref target=p889>889</ref>

<p>Madhooie, <ref target=p879>879</ref>

<p>Mahameed, <ref target=p961>961</ref>

<p>Maha Moondie, <ref target=p953>953</ref>

<p>Mahaneem, <ref target=p957>957</ref>

<p>Mahasutawurie, <ref target=p959>959</ref>

<p>Mahawunth, <ref target=p960>960</ref>

<p>Mahawur, <ref target=p962>962</ref>

<p>Mahesingie, <ref target=p888>888</ref>

<p>Mahkee, <ref target=p955>955</ref>

<p>Mahwa, <ref target=p954>954</ref>

<p>Maien, <ref target=p883>883</ref>

<pb id=pb192 n=192>

<p>Majoophill, or <hi>Maijphill</hi>, <ref target=p885>885</ref>

<p>Malknagnie, <ref target=p878>878</ref>

<p>Malook, <ref target=p887>887</ref>

<p>Maoarowbnee, <ref target=p880>880</ref>

<p>Mayoorabuka, <ref target=p965>965</ref>

<p>Mayursuka, <ref target=p964>964</ref>

<p>Meed, <ref target=p971>971</ref>

<p>Meetanioboo, <ref target=p972>972</ref>

<p>Mendha, <ref target=p966>966</ref>

<p>Mendi, <ref target=p958>958</ref>

<p>Mendi Auwul, <ref target=p963>963</ref>

<p>Merch, <ref target=p909>909</ref>

<p>Merchai, <ref target=p910>910</ref>

<p>Merg, <ref target=p906>906</ref>

<p>Mernal, <ref target=p912>912</ref>

<p>Methie, <ref target=p968>968</ref>

<p>Missie, also <hi>Kakjunga</hi>, <ref target=p914>914</ref>

<p>Mogra, <ref target=p951>951</ref>

<p>Mohoka, <ref target=p956>956</ref>

<p>Mohuk, <ref target=p936>936</ref>

<p>Mokhun, <ref target=p937>937</ref>

<p>Moocherae, <ref target=p935>935</ref>

<p>Moodukpurnie, <ref target=p901>901</ref>

<p>Moogta Sukut, <ref target=p921>921</ref>

<p>Moogtaphill, <ref target=p927>927</ref>

<p>Moojkuod, <ref target=p896>896</ref>

<p>Mookul, <ref target=p944>944</ref>

<p>Moolie, or <hi>Moolug</hi>, <ref target=p945>945</ref>

<p>Moom, <ref target=p943>943</ref>

<p>Moondie, <ref target=p927>927</ref>

<p>Moondookpurnie, <ref target=p930>930</ref>

<p>Moong, <ref target=p938>938</ref>

<p>Moonga, <ref target=p947>947</ref>

<p>Moonjee, <ref target=p933>933</ref>

<p>Moora, <ref target=p905>905</ref>

<p>Moorhurrie, <ref target=p904>904</ref>

<p>Moorhuttee, <ref target=p908>908</ref>

<p>Moorsheka, <ref target=p950>950</ref>

<p>Mooser, <ref target=p934>934</ref>

<p>Mooslee, or <hi>Mooslicund</hi>, <ref target=p949>949</ref>

<p>Moot, <ref target=p932>932</ref>

<p>Morba, <ref target=p941>941</ref>

<p>More, <ref target=p940>940</ref>

<p>Moth, <ref target=p939>939</ref>

<p>Motha, <ref target=p942>942</ref>

<p>Motie, <ref target=p946>946</ref>

<p>Mowlserie, <ref target=p899>899</ref>

<p>Muchechi, <ref target=p898>898</ref>

<p>Mucheli, <ref target=p893>893</ref>

<p>Mudden, <ref target=p894>894</ref>

<p>Muddenphill, <ref target=p948>948</ref>

<p>Mudh, <ref target=p900>900</ref>

<p>Mudhkurkuttie, <ref target=p903>903</ref>

<p>Mudhoolka, <ref target=p902>902</ref>

<p>Mudhraa, <ref target=p897>897</ref>

<p>Mug Peepul, <ref target=p920>920</ref>

<p>Muggur, <ref target=p918>918</ref>

<p>Mujeeth, <ref target=p895>895</ref>

<p>Mukbara, also <hi>Mukhana</hi>, <ref target=p923>923</ref>

<p>Muko, <ref target=p919>919</ref>

<p>Mukoond, <ref target=p917>917</ref>

<p>Mullagheer, <ref target=p924>924</ref>

<p>Mulleen, <ref target=p926>926</ref>

<p>Mulleka, <ref target=p925>925</ref>

<pb id=pb193 n=193>

<p>Mundar, <ref target=p931>931</ref>

<p>Munn, <ref target=p928>928</ref>

<p>Munmal, <ref target=p929>929</ref>

<p>Murdok, <ref target=p979>979</ref>

<p>Murorphillie, <ref target=p913>913</ref>

<p>Mursa, <ref target=p911>911</ref>

<p>Murua, <ref target=p907>907</ref>

<p>Musakunie, <ref target=p952>952</ref>

<p>Musoor, <ref target=p915>915</ref>

<p>Mustchagundka, <ref target=p916>916</ref>

<p>Muttreegurba, <ref target=p892>892</ref>

<p>Muttur <ref target=p891>891</ref>

<p>Mydhasingie, <ref target=p969>969</ref>

<p>Mynphill, <ref target=p967>967</ref>

<p>Myoorjung, <ref target=p970>970</ref>


<div2>
<head>N.</head>

<p>Naa&oelig;, <ref target=p983>983</ref>

<p>Nadey, <ref target=p980>980</ref>

<p>Nagermotha, <ref target=p981>981</ref>

<p>Nagbulla, <ref target=p989>982</ref>

<p>Nagdown, <ref target=p977>977</ref>

<p>Nagdumnie, <ref target=p978>978</ref>

<p>Nagesur, <ref target=p976>976</ref>

<p>Nainjooth, <ref target=p1018>1018</ref>

<p>Nalee, or <hi>Narie</hi>, <ref target=p973>973</ref>

<p>Naringee, <ref target=p975>975</ref>

<p>Naryit, <ref target=p974>974</ref>

<p>Neeb, <ref target=p1015>1015</ref>

<p>Neel, <ref target=p1013>1013</ref>

<p>Neela Sindhuk, <ref target=p1010>1010</ref>

<p>Neela Totha, <ref target=p1005>1005</ref>

<p>Neelgau, <ref target=p1017>1017</ref>

<p>Neelasabood, <ref target=p1014>1014</ref>

<p>Neelkant, <ref target=p1008>1008</ref>

<p>Neelkunti, <ref target=p1019>1019</ref>

<p>Neelobe, <ref target=p1016>1016</ref>

<p>Neenboo, <ref target=p1013>1013</ref>

<p>Neendie, <ref target=p1009>1009</ref>

<p>Neenuk, <ref target=p1006>1006</ref>

<p>Neeturbala, <ref target=p1004>1004</ref>

<p>Nekund Baaperi, <ref target=p998>998</ref>

<p>Nemuk Chitchera, <ref target=p993>993</ref>

<p>Nemuk Kutchloon, <ref target=p995>995</ref>

<p>Nemuk S&oelig;ndha, <ref target=p997>997</ref>

<p>Nemuk Soonchur, also <hi>Nemuk Sia</hi>, <ref target=p994>994</ref>

<p>Nemuk Udhbidh, <ref target=p996>996</ref>

<p>Nergoondie, <ref target=p986>986</ref>

<p>Nerkutchoor, <ref target=p985>985</ref>

<p>Newarrie, <ref target=p1001>1001</ref>

<p>Newla, <ref target=p1007>1007</ref>

<p>Neyrmellie, <ref target=p987>987</ref>

<p>Nirbissie, <ref target=p984>984</ref>

<p>Niswut, <ref target=p988>988</ref>

<p>Nowllee, <ref target=p1003>1003</ref>

<p>Nowsader, <ref target=p1002>1002</ref>

<p>Nuk, <ref target=p989>989</ref>

<p>Nukchecknie, <ref target=p990>990</ref>

<p>Null, or <hi>Nullie</hi>, <ref target=p992>992</ref>

<p>Nullwa, <ref target=p991>991</ref>

<p>Nunahuld, also <hi>Mamerran</hi> <ref target=p1000>1000</ref>

<p>Nundbyrchun, or <hi>Nundbyrkha</hi>, <ref target=p999>999</ref>

<p>Nypaul, also <hi>Nupaul Neib</hi>, <ref target=p1011>1011</ref>



<pb id=pb194 n=194>
<div2>
<head><corr>P.</corr></head>


<p>Paá, <ref target=p92>92</ref>

<p>Paadae, <ref target=p101>101</ref>

<p>Paan, <ref target=p110>110</ref>

<p>Padill, also <hi>Patill</hi>, <ref target=p91>91</ref>

<p>Paethaon, also <hi>Culsi</hi> or <hi>Breshtpirnie</hi>, <ref target=p128>128</ref>

<p>Pakur, also <hi>Pakull</hi>, <ref target=p99>99</ref>

<p>Palass, also <hi>Pullae</hi>, <ref target=p190>190</ref>

<p>Palass Peepul, <ref target=p192>192</ref>

<p>Palewut, also <hi>Palook</hi>, <ref target=p96>96</ref>

<p>Palug, <ref target=p109>109</ref>

<p>Panee Amluk, <ref target=p100>100</ref>

<p>Papeitha, <ref target=p125>125</ref>

<p>Paperie, <ref target=p103>103</ref>

<p>Papeyha, <ref target=p127>127</ref>

<p>Papieha, <ref target=p123>123</ref>

<p>Papotun, <ref target=p124>124</ref>

<p>Para, or <hi>Parud</hi>, <ref target=p112>112</ref>

<p>Parha, <ref target=p106>106</ref>

<p>Pariss Peepol, also <hi>Palass Peepul</hi>, <ref target=p111>111</ref>

<p>Parjath, or <hi>Parbhudder</hi>, <ref target=p119>119</ref>

<p>Passownie, <ref target=p278>278</ref>

<p>Patera, also <hi>Patèla</hi>, <ref target=p130>130</ref>

<p>Patirr, <ref target=p118>118</ref>

<p>Patole, <ref target=p129>129</ref>

<p>Patung, <ref target=p131>131</ref>

<p>Pechuck, <ref target=p265>265</ref>

<p>Pedloon, also <hi>Kutchloon</hi>, <ref target=p156>156</ref>

<p>Peease, <ref target=p274>274</ref>

<p>Peeche, <ref target=p280>280</ref>

<p>Peeloo, <ref target=p272>272</ref>

<p>Peeplamool, <ref target=p275>275</ref>

<p>Peepul, <ref target=p269>269</ref>

<p>Peertuckhpirnie, <ref target=p169>169</ref>

<p>Peeta, also <hi>Khunda</hi>, <ref target=p277>277</ref>

<p>Peetul, <ref target=p268>268</ref>

<p>Pendaloo, <ref target=p205>205</ref>

<p>Peoke, or <hi>Peossie</hi>, <ref target=p273>273</ref>

<p>Pereshtpurnie, <ref target=p161>161</ref>

<p>Peroza, or <hi>Berektummun</hi>, <ref target=p176>176</ref>

<p>Phaar, <ref target=p251>251</ref>

<p>Phaloke, <ref target=p260>260</ref>

<p>Phalisae, or <hi>Phálsa</hi>, <ref target=p229>229</ref>

<p>Phankra, <ref target=p253>253</ref>

<p>Phirrhud, <ref target=p231>231</ref>

<p>Phitkerrie, <ref target=p255>255</ref>

<p>Phoje, <ref target=p234>234</ref>

<p>Phooth, <ref target=p263>263</ref>

<p>Phunjeetuck, <ref target=p240>240</ref>

<p>Pindaluck, or <hi>Pindal</hi>, <ref target=p206>206</ref>

<p>Pindkhajoor, <ref target=p208>208</ref>

<p>Pindole, <ref target=p204>204</ref>

<p>Pithpapra, <ref target=p133>133</ref>

<p>Pockurmool, <ref target=p235>235</ref>

<p>Podeena, <ref target=p228>228</ref>

<p>Podhka, or <hi>Boleserie</hi>, <ref target=p222>222</ref>

<p>Poiey, <ref target=p221>221</ref>

<p>Ponauk, <ref target=p201>201</ref>

<p>Ponda, <ref target=p226>226</ref>

<p>Poondereek, <ref target=p211>211</ref>

<p>Potie, <ref target=p224>224</ref>

<p>Potuck, <ref target=p225>225</ref>

<p>Pudumcharnie, <ref target=p154>154</ref>

<p>Pudmeinie, <ref target=p153>153</ref>

<pb id=pb195 n=195>

<p>Pudumrauj, <ref target=p155>155</ref>

<p>Pulwull, <ref target=p193>193</ref>

<p>Punchcheer, <ref target=p213>213</ref>

<p>Punealae, <ref target=p220>220</ref>

<p>Pungekool, <ref target=p214>214</ref>

<p>Punjemool, <ref target=p215>215</ref>

<p>Punk, <ref target=p202>202</ref>

<p>Punna, <ref target=p209>209</ref>

<p>Punnus, <ref target=p219>219</ref>

<p>Puns, <ref target=p218>218</ref>

<p>Purbal, <ref target=p167>167</ref>

<p>Purpeeloo, <ref target=p159>159</ref>

<p>Purundha, <ref target=p172>172</ref>

<p>Pursarnie, <ref target=p173>173</ref>

<p>Pushanbedh, <ref target=p187>187</ref>

<p>Putalphoorie, <ref target=p140>140</ref>

<p>Putrudj, <ref target=p132>132</ref>

<p>Puturjenie, <ref target=p141>141</ref>

<p>Pynvar, or <hi>T&oelig;roota</hi>, <ref target=p200>200</ref>

<p>Pystha, <ref target=p178>178</ref>

<p>Pysturling, <ref target=p139>139</ref>

<p>Pytha, <ref target=p179>179</ref>


<div2>
<head>R.</head>

<p>Raab, <ref target=p477>477</ref>

<p>Raal, <ref target=p483>483</ref>

<p>Raang, <ref target=p482>482</ref>

<p>Rahusphill, <ref target=p515>515</ref>

<p>Rai, <ref target=p482>482</ref>

<p>Raibele, <ref target=p486>486</ref>

<p>Raidooree, <ref target=p488>488</ref>

<p>Rajehuns, <ref target=p481>481</ref>

<p>Rajejakha, <ref target=p480>480</ref>

<p>Rajeneemboophile, <ref target=p485>485</ref>

<p>Raje Umber, <ref target=p478>478</ref>

<p>Raje Ummur, <ref target=p489>489</ref>

<p>Ramputtrie, <ref target=p484>484</ref>

<p>Rashna, <ref target=p487>487</ref>

<p>Rasie<corr>,</corr> <ref target=p490>490</ref>

<p>Rassun. Also <hi>Raisun</hi>, or <hi>Rowasun</hi>, <ref target=p479>479</ref>

<p>Rattaloo, also <hi>Runtaloo</hi>, <ref target=p492>492</ref>

<p>Rawasun, <ref target=p507>507</ref>

<p>Recktaal, or <hi>Rukitkund</hi>, <ref target=p601>601</ref>

<p>Reech, <ref target=p517>517</ref>

<p>Reenga, <ref target=p518>518</ref>

<p>Reetha, <ref target=p519>519</ref>

<p>Reewudj, <ref target=p516>516</ref>

<p>Rekhbuk, <hi>Rekhbukh</hi>, or <hi>Rekhba</hi>, <ref target=p500>500</ref>

<p>Rewind, <ref target=p520>520</ref>

<p>Roheera, <ref target=p514>514</ref>

<p>Rohni, <ref target=p513>513</ref>

<p>Rohoo, <ref target=p508>508</ref>

<p>Romus, or <hi>Mudwal</hi>, <ref target=p512>512</ref>

<p>Roohus, <ref target=p509>509</ref>

<p>Roodraz, <ref target=p495>495</ref>

<p>Roodwunti, <ref target=p495>495</ref>

<p>Rooi, <ref target=p511>511</ref>

<p>Roopa, also <hi>Roopuk</hi>, <ref target=p510>510</ref>

<p>Ruckitchunden, <ref target=p502>502</ref>

<p>Rudd, <ref target=p494>494</ref>

<p>Rukitphoop, <ref target=p504>504</ref>

<p>Rukitsal, <ref target=p503>503</ref>

<p>Rungni, <ref target=p505>505</ref>

<p>Rungtirra, also <hi>Sungtirra</hi>, <ref target=p506>506</ref>

<p>Russ, <ref target=p497>497</ref>

<pb id=pb196 n=196>

<p>Russ Kapoor, <ref target=p499>499</ref>

<p>Rusunjeen, <ref target=p498>498</ref>

<p>Ruswut, <ref target=p496>496</ref>

<p>Ruttun, <ref target=p493>493</ref>

<p>Ruttunjooth, also <hi>Abookhoolsa</hi>, <ref target=p491>491</ref>


<div2>
<head>S.</head>

<p>Saaje, <ref target=p534>534</ref>

<p>Saal, <ref target=p542>542</ref>

<p>Saale, <ref target=p536>536</ref>

<p>Saalie, <ref target=p532>532</ref>

<p>Saalpernie, or <hi>Saloom</hi>, <ref target=p531>531</ref>

<p>Saaltie, also <hi>Kapoor Kutcherie</hi>, <ref target=p533>533</ref>

<p>Saamp, <ref target=p541>541</ref>

<p>Saarba, <ref target=p527>527</ref>

<p>Sabur, <ref target=p539>539</ref>

<p>Saeb, <ref target=p634>634</ref>

<p>Sagown, or <hi>Saag</hi>, <ref target=p530>530</ref>

<p>Sahidei, <ref target=p619>619</ref>

<p>Sahunserbede, <ref target=p617>617</ref>

<p>Salamookh, <ref target=p537>537</ref>

<p>Saluk, or <hi>Salook</hi>, <ref target=p529>529</ref>

<p>Sanbir, <ref target=p526>526</ref>

<p>Saramill, <hi>Sarumluk</hi>, or <hi>Saral</hi>, <ref target=p528>528</ref>

<p>Sarass, <ref target=p540>540</ref>

<p>Saro, <ref target=p538>538</ref>

<p>Satoon, <ref target=p543>543</ref>

<p>Sawang, <ref target=p535>535</ref>

<p>Sealie, <ref target=p628>628</ref>

<p>Sebaloo, <hi>Sebalie</hi>, or <hi>Nindee</hi>, <ref target=p589>589</ref>

<p>Sedarth, <ref target=p554>554</ref>

<p>Seelidj, <ref target=p632>632</ref>

<p>Seenaki, <ref target=p629>629</ref>

<p>Seenku, <ref target=p630>630</ref>

<p>Seep, or <hi>Seepie</hi>, <ref target=p633>633</ref>

<p>Seetaphill, <ref target=p635>635</ref>

<p>Segund Philla, <ref target=p575>575</ref>

<p>Sehoond, <ref target=p623>623</ref>

<p>Semb, also <hi>Séme</hi>, <ref target=p622>622</ref>

<p>Sembill, <ref target=p621>621</ref>

<p>Sendhæ, <ref target=p627>627</ref>

<p>Sendhi, <ref target=p626>626</ref>

<p>Seotie, <ref target=p631>631</ref>

<p>Sericbans, <ref target=p563>563</ref>

<p>Seriepurnie, also <hi>Gumbar</hi>, <ref target=p570>570</ref>

<p>Seriss, also <hi>Sereeka</hi>, <ref target=p564>564</ref>

<p>Serje, <ref target=p560>560</ref>

<p>Seroopbudder, <ref target=p571>571</ref>

<p>Seroopjeea, <ref target=p569>569</ref>

<p>Setawur, also <hi>Setawurie</hi>, or <hi>Shetawur</hi>, <ref target=p549>549</ref>

<p>Setoopula, <ref target=p548>548</ref>

<p>Shaldan, <ref target=p637>637</ref>

<p>Shalook, <ref target=p638>638</ref>

<p>Sheesha, <ref target=p654>654</ref>

<p>Sheeshum, also <hi>Seeshum</hi>, <ref target=p655>655</ref>

<p>Sheeta, <ref target=p653>653</ref>

<p>Shehut, <ref target=p652>652</ref>

<p>Sheobogun, <ref target=p656>656</ref>

<p>Shereefa, also <hi>Seetaphill</hi>, <ref target=p642>642</ref>

<p>Shetoot, <ref target=p651>651</ref>

<p>Shitawuballie, <ref target=p641>641</ref>

<p>Sholie, <ref target=p649>649</ref>

<p>Shora, <ref target=p650>650</ref>

<p>Shubbe, <ref target=p639>639</ref>

<p>Shuftaloo, <ref target=p643>643</ref>

<pb id=pb197 n=197>

<p>Shukur Javan, <ref target=p644>644</ref>

<p>Shukur Kund, <ref target=p645>645</ref>

<p>Shumie, also <hi>Seenkur</hi>, <ref target=p646>646</ref>

<p>Shungirf, also <hi>Ingoor</hi>, <ref target=p648>648</ref>

<p>Shunphopee, <ref target=p647>647</ref>

<p>Shutawur, <ref target=p640>640</ref>

<p>Sial, <ref target=p625>625</ref>

<p>Sillajeet, also <hi>Silladeet</hi>, <ref target=p577>577</ref>

<p>Sillaruss, <ref target=p578>578</ref>

<p>Sindoor, <ref target=p590>590</ref>

<p>Sindoorie, <ref target=p585>585</ref>

<p>Singhara, <ref target=p584>584</ref>

<p>Singia, or <hi>Singia Jur</hi>, also <hi>Singia Khar</hi>, or <hi>Beechnak</hi>, <ref target=p636>636</ref>

<p>Sip Kullie, <ref target=p544>544</ref>

<p>Sirool, <ref target=p565>565</ref>

<p>Sirpund, <ref target=p562>562</ref>

<p>Sirsom, or <hi>Seerkup</hi>, <ref target=p566>566</ref>

<p>Sirunmaki, <ref target=p568>568</ref>

<p>Sisoo, or <hi>Sishum</hi>, <ref target=p624>624</ref>

<p>Sohaga, <ref target=p620>620</ref>

<p>Sohora, <ref target=p616>616</ref>

<p>Sohunjena, or <hi>Suhinjena</hi>, or <hi>Sajena</hi>, or <hi>Sekir</hi>, <ref target=p618>618</ref>

<p>Somooder Lone, <ref target=p581>581</ref>

<p>Somooder Phane, <ref target=p580>580</ref>

<p>Somooderphill, <ref target=p579>579</ref>

<p>Somoodersake, <ref target=p582>582</ref>

<p>Somph, <ref target=p605>605</ref>

<p>Sona, <ref target=p604>604</ref>

<p>Sonamukie, <ref target=p597>597</ref>

<p>Sonth, <ref target=p606>606</ref>

<p>Soocherakhar, <ref target=p553>553</ref>

<p>Sooderie, <ref target=p610>610</ref>

<p>Sooe Junglie, <ref target=p612>612</ref>

<p>Soogunass, <ref target=p576>576</ref>

<p>Soomboolkhar, <ref target=p591>591</ref>

<p>Soombullie, <ref target=p599>599</ref>

<p>Soonchur, <ref target=p608>608</ref>

<p>Soonkullie, <ref target=p613>613</ref>

<p>Soopearee, <ref target=p545>545</ref>

<p>Soopee, <ref target=p603>603</ref>

<p>Soorinjoothka, <ref target=p596>596</ref>

<p>Soorjemooki, <ref target=p609>609</ref>

<p>Sooroon, <ref target=p598>598</ref>

<p>Soorudijhall, <ref target=p615>615</ref>

<p>Soorunkitki, <ref target=p567>567</ref>

<p>Sooryalee, <ref target=p561>561</ref>

<p>Soos, <ref target=p600>600</ref>

<p>Soubustanee, <ref target=p611>611</ref>

<p>Sowa, <ref target=p607>607</ref>

<p>Sowall, <ref target=p614>614</ref>

<p>Subskun, <ref target=p546>546</ref>

<p>Sud Sohaung, <ref target=p555>555</ref>

<p>Suda Khar, <ref target=p556>556</ref>

<p>Sudagolab, <ref target=p558>558</ref>

<p>Sudaphill, or <hi>Sudeephill</hi>, <ref target=p557>557</ref>

<p>Suer, <ref target=p601>601</ref>

<p>Suffrie Ambr, <ref target=p574>574</ref>

<p>Sungjerahut, also <hi>Sungderaz</hi>, <ref target=p594>594</ref>

<p>Sungjoothka, <ref target=p595>595</ref>

<p>Sungkaholie, <ref target=p586>586</ref>

<p>Sungtirra, <ref target=p583>583</ref>

<p>Sunkh, <ref target=p588>588</ref>

<p>Sunkhal, <ref target=p593>593</ref>

<pb id=pb198 n=198>

<p>Sunkia, <ref target=p592>592</ref>

<p>Sunn, <ref target=p587>587</ref>

<p>Surphoka, also <hi>Soojer</hi>, <ref target=p559>559</ref>

<p>Surwalla, <ref target=p572>572</ref>

<p>Sussa, <ref target=p573>573</ref>

<p>Sutarie, <ref target=p547>547</ref>

<p>Suteepulas, <ref target=p552>552</ref>

<p>Sutputtrie, <ref target=p550>550</ref>

<p>Sutsar, <ref target=p551>551</ref>

<p>Suwa, <ref target=p602>602</ref>


<div2>
<head>T.</head>

<p>Taal, or <hi>Taar</hi>, <ref target=p283>283</ref>

<p>Taalesputter, <ref target=p284>284</ref>

<p>Taberuck, <ref target=p286>286</ref>

<p>Takkur, <ref target=p305>305</ref>

<p>Talmukara, or <hi>Talmukana</hi>, <ref target=p282>282</ref>

<p>Tamaal, <ref target=p312>312</ref>

<p>Tamaalputtur, <ref target=p314>314</ref>

<p>Tanbirr, <ref target=p285>285</ref>

<p>Tarkoota, or <hi>Terookhun</hi>, <ref target=p294>294</ref>

<p>Tatyrie, <ref target=p289>289</ref>

<p>Tawakeer, <ref target=p320>320</ref>

<p>Tedhara, <ref target=p292>292</ref>

<p>Teerun, <ref target=p335>335</ref>

<p>Teetee, <ref target=p337>337</ref>

<p>Teetur, <ref target=p330>330</ref>

<p>Telk, <ref target=p308>308</ref>

<p>Telkirur, or <hi>Telkúr</hi>, <ref target=p332>332</ref>

<p>Teluck, <ref target=p307>307</ref>

<p>Tendhoo, also <hi>Tendook</hi>, <ref target=p328>328</ref>

<p>Tendooa, <ref target=p331>331</ref>

<p>Teraemanna, also <hi>Teraman</hi>, <ref target=p229>229</ref>

<p>Terbile, <ref target=p336>336</ref>

<p>Teriagundh, of <hi>Tirjatuck</hi>, <ref target=p295>295</ref>

<p>Teroor, also great <hi>Dathun</hi>, <ref target=p300>300</ref>

<p>Tersindiaturnie, <ref target=p298>298</ref>

<p>Tesoo, <ref target=p333>333</ref>

<p>Tezpat, <ref target=p334>334</ref>

<p>Thour, <ref target=p327>327</ref>

<p>Till, or <hi>Tillee</hi>, <ref target=p309>309</ref>

<p>Tirdisha, <ref target=p302>302</ref>

<p>Tirmirra, <ref target=p297>297</ref>

<p>Tirnie, <ref target=p301>301</ref>

<pb id=pb199 n=199>

<p>Tirpurnie, <ref target=p304>304</ref>

<p>Tirtuck, <ref target=p296>296</ref>

<p>Tittereck, also <hi>Tintereek</hi>, <ref target=p290>290</ref>

<p>Tombrir, also <hi>Tombie</hi>, <ref target=p321>321</ref>

<p>Toodun, <ref target=p325>325</ref>

<p>Tooiekam, <ref target=p324>324</ref>

<p>Toolsi, <ref target=p310>310</ref>

<p>Toon, <ref target=p315>315</ref>, <ref target=p316>316</ref>

<p>Toor, <ref target=p31>31</ref>

<p>Toott, <ref target=p326>326</ref>

<p>Toour, <ref target=p323>323</ref>

<p>Tubasheer, or <hi>Tubakeer</hi>, <ref target=p287>287</ref>

<p>Tudje, also <hi>Keelkheela</hi>, <ref target=p291>291</ref>

<p>Tuggur, <ref target=p306>306</ref>

<p>Tomakoo, <ref target=p311>311</ref>

<p>Tumbole, <ref target=p318>318</ref>

<p>Tunkaar, <ref target=p319>319</ref>

<p>Tuntureek, also <hi>Seemák</hi>, <ref target=p317>317</ref>

<p>Tuputtee, or <hi>Typsie</hi>, <ref target=p288>288</ref>

<p>Turai, <ref target=p322>322</ref>

<p>Turkool, <ref target=p293>293</ref>

<p>Tym, <ref target=p313>313</ref>

<p>Tyrphilla, <ref target=p303>303</ref>


<div2>
<head>V.</head>

<p>Vaasun, also <hi>Bootee Shaikh Fureed</hi>, <ref target=p1020>1020</ref>

<p>Vcherkhar, <ref target=p1021>1021</ref>

<p>Veedoorie, also <hi>Bedoorie</hi>, <ref target=p1022>1022</ref>

<p>Veroojun, also <hi>Beroojun</hi>, <ref target=p1023>1023</ref>


<div2>
<head>Z.</head>

<p>Zachmeheath, <ref target=p523>523</ref>

<p>Zeera, <ref target=p521>521</ref>

<p>Zeerki, <ref target=p522>522</ref>

<p>Zerki, also <hi>Kála Dana</hi>, <ref target=p524>524</ref>

<p>Zumiekund, <ref target=p525>525</ref>




<div2 id=toc-app type=Appendix>
<head>APPENDIX.</head>



<list>
<item>&nbsp; <ab type=tocPageNum><hi>Page.</hi></ab>

<item>Burning of hands and feet, <ab type=tocPageNum>177</ab>
<item>Parts of human body, <ab type=tocPageNum>178</ab>
<item>Tastes, <ab type=tocPageNum><hi>ibid.</hi></ab>
<item>Secretions or humours, <ab type=tocPageNum><hi>ibid.</hi></ab>
<item>Degrees, <ab type=tocPageNum>179</ab>
<item>Weights, <ab type=tocPageNum><hi>ibid.</hi></ab>
<item>Abbreviations, <ab type=tocPageNum><hi>ibid.</hi></ab>
</list>


<pb id=pb200 n=200>

<p>N. B. A few articles contained in the original work, viz. Medicines principally used in sorcery and incantation, have been omitted with the Translator&apos;s permission. This renders the succession of Nos. of the articles irregular,&mdash;for instance, No. 72 follows next after No. 70.


<p rend="class(signed)">W. T.


</div1>


<divGen id=toc type=toc>


<divGen type=Colophon>


</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>

<!--

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[ ] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with a tag.

TEI header

[ ] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (http://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (http://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work) (http://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (http://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend="indent(2)"

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[ ] Include all illustrations
[ ] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[ ] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[ ] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.  ([0-9])\&ndash;([0-9])/([0-9]) becomes \1\&frac\2\3;
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->
